BLACK MARLIN
BLUE MARLIN
WAHOO
canthocybium solandri
GREAT
HAMMERHEAD SHARK
Sphyrna mokarran
DUSKY DOLPHIN
Lagenorhynchus obscurus
COMMON
THRESHER SHARK
Alopias vulpinus
ROOSTERFISH
Nomatus prearls
YELLOWFIN TUNA
Thunnus albacares
AFRICAN POMPANO
RiEcus Clahs
SHARKSUCKER
COMMON DOLPHINFISH

---new item--

PULL DOWN ON THI ROPE TO LIFT THE PIANO

---new item--

THE ENERGY MACHINE

---new item--

WHAT ABOUT WATER?

---new item--

BASIC CHEMISTRY: IT'S ELEMENTARY!
Chevron and Westlake Corporation
THE PERIODIC TABLE OF STUFF

---new item--

MACROMATTER

---new item--

STAR FORGE

---new item--

ASTROPHYSICS: GO BIG

---new item--

DEMONSTRATION LAB presented by Shell USA, Inc.

---new item--

CRATING MATTER: NANO TO MEGA presented by Oxy

---new item--

WELCOME TO YOUR PREHISTORIC SAFARI
Here you will meet the heroic microbes that battled acid seas and poisonous air, and won.
You will greet multitudes of trilobites, each one a jewel of evolution. Ferocious fish will guide you through the conquest of land and a Texas fin-back will introduce you to your own ancient reptilian ancestors.
Dinosaurs carry the story through age of T. rex, but the journey will not be smooth. Sudden mass extinctions will punctuate your progress. Wave after wave of new and marvelous beasts will seize control of the ecosystem, only to suffer disaster from mysterious causes.
In the final stages of your Prehistoric Safari you will see an invention that changed the rules of nature —The atlatl - and learn where we humans fit in the flow of history.
THE MORIAN HALL OF PALEONTOLOGY

---new item--

PRECAMBRIAN

---new item--

CAMBRIAN

---new item--

ORDOVICIAN

---new item--

VENDIAN

---new item--

THE ENCHANTED GARDEN OF EDIACARA

---new item--

SILURIAN

---new item--

DEVONIAN

---new item--

CARBONIFEROUS

---new item--

EXXONMOBIL PERMIAN BASIN EARLY PERMIAN

---new item--

EXTINCTION EVENT

---new item--

ARCHOSAURS
The "Ruling Reptiles" Both Smilosuchus and Postosuchus, shown here, were
"Ruling Reptiles," members of the fabulous clan known technically as Archosauria.
Archosaurs were the most dynamic new group of land animels to evolve during the Permian-Triassic event. Early archosaurs had a body plan with many crocodilian features. The most important new feature was the triple-holed skull.
In addition to the usual head-holes for nostrils and eyeballs and the notch in back for the eardrum, archosaurs added two extra holes, one above the other, between the eye socket and ear.
The lower jaw contributed the third hole-right in the middle below the last tooth crowns.
Triple-holes were set deep in the archosaur DNA. Later, when some advanced groups lost one or another hole, the arrangement of the bones showed sutures where the holes had been closed through the course of evolution.
Three holes were the mark of ecological royalty. All early crocodiles were triple-holed, as were a dozen other groups of Triassic archosaurs less famous. 'Dactyls, the
"flying reptiles," had triple holes, and the most renowned of all prehistoric animals carried triple-hole heads:
The Dinosauria.

---new item--

PAULA AND RUSTY WALTER MESOZO GALLERY
LATE JURASSIC

---new item--

WHIP-TAIL TRIPODS
Diplodocus
The Jurassic was the Golden Age of vegetarian giants.
"Long-necks," formally known as sauropods, grew larger and larger until they reached 30 tons or more— as heavy as five normal-sized elephants.
No clan of land animals ever matched the bulk of the Long-necks.
What was their secret?
Sauropod necks were hollow and filled with air, like bird necks, so the beasts could swing the neck side-to-side quickly. To reach high in the tree-tops, long-necks went tripodal. Hind legs were much stronger than the fore legs, and the tail served as a third limb for balancing when the body tilted up.
Diplodocus was the ultimate tripod. Its tail was immensely strong, and its torso was lightened by hollowed-out vertebrae. When tipped up, the head could reach 25 feet. Close cousin Barosaurus could reach 36 feet.
With heads that high, the heart couldn't pump blood to the brain. No problem. The brain was tiny and could function without fresh blood for 10 minutes at a time.
Long-necks didn't chew. Instead, they plucked branches off trees and passed the food down to their muscular gizzards, where hard rocks crushed and split the vegetable bits. Fossilized gizzard stones have been dug inside the ribcages of long-necks and their kin.
For defense, Diplodocus had a giant bull whip. The last 30 feet of the tail were made from thin bone rods jointed together and encased in tough connective tissue. The powerful muscles at the front of the tail could swing the whip-end with tremendous speed. A direct hit on a meat-eater's face would cause dreadful pain.
By the Late Jurassic, the dinosaur clans had expanded into a dozen families of planteaters, mostly long-necks.

---new item--

PAULA AND RUSTY WALTER ME: Z0IC GALLERY
LATE CRETACEOUS

---new item--

THE TWO-FINGERED TYRANNOSAUR
Gorgosaurus
Tyrannosaurus rex is inarguably the world's No. 1 favorite dinosaur. It came late in its family history, in the Lancian Age. The earliest members of the tyrannosaur family were smaller; the species called Gorgosaurus ruled the Judithian Age, growing to 2 tons —10 times heavier than a big male lion, but less than half the size of a T. rex.
Go gosaurus had the distinctive hands of the tyrannosaur ramily. Instead of the three-fingered hands of allosaurs ar acrocanthosaurs, gorgosaurs had hands with two small, weak fingers. The shoulder blade and upper arm were much thinner and less muscular than those of earlier carnivores.
Why did Tyrannosaurs evolve such weak arms and hands?
Professor Henry Fairfield Osborn, who named Tyrannosaurus and the tyrannosaur family in 1905, had an answer:
Tyrannosaurs were ticklers!
Osborn knew that big, scary apex predators might need a way to express soft, family-friendly emotions.
A tyrannosaur male might reach out to a female and delicately massage her shoulders. Or a mother
tyrannosaur might stroke he
when trey helped
in raising the tyrannosauce
Swift Ankles, Speedy Shine
The best way to compare speed in meat-eating dinosaurs is by comparing ankles and spins. Faster speed requires longer legs below the knee.
Compare Gorgosaurus to the Early Cretaceous
Acrocanthosaurus. The gorgosaur clearly has an advantage in limb proportions, and thus could outrun the earlier Cretaceous predator.
Why did big meat-eaters get faster? Was there a co-evolutionary arms race between predator and prey?
Were herbivorous dinosaurs getting faster in the Late Cretaceous? No— the common plant-eaters of the Late Cretaceous, the duck-bills, were about as fast as their Early-Cretaceous relatives, the iguanodonts.
This is yet another dinosaur puzzle. The faster Tyrannosaurs replaced the slower acrocanthosaurs and their relatives, even though prey speed stayed the same.

---new item--

GIANT SHORT-FACED BEAR
Arctodus
If you were a full-grown saber-toothed Smilodon, what animal should you think twice about before attacking?
The giant short-faced bear!
One of the largest bears to ever inhabit North America, Arctodus reached heights of 15 feet and weights of a ton and a half-twice the size of the average male grizzly bear. But Arctodus was far leggier than grizzlies and polar bears and probably faster.
A short, wide muzzle and deep snout gave Arctodus a vice-like grip. What did it eat? Anything it could catch!
Large molars were capable of crunching young grass, roots, and berries. Killer fangs could dispatch a buffalo with one bite. Analysis of chemicals in some Arctodus fossils show a high concentration of nitrogen-15, an element that accumulates when an animal eats a diet rich in meat. Other short-faced bear populations probably favored a more vegetarian diet.
North America sent bear invaders into South America.
The short-faced bear clan set up evolutionary centers in both continents. Arctotherium reached an all-time ursid record in Argentina, growing to two tons.

---new item--

INVASIVE SPECIES

---new item--

HIGH PLAINS

---new item--

GUADALUPE MOUNTAINS

---new item--

PINEY WOODS

---new item--

American Brown Pelican
Pelecanus occidentalis
American Brown Pelican: A Conservation & Restoration Success Story
(From Audubon Texas website)
Through the early 1900s, shooting for the millinery trade and to "protect" fishing caused a major decline in the Brown Pelican population. Legal protection began in 1903 when Pelican Island, Florida, was set aside as a federal preserve. Despite this, and despite the birds' longevity and popularity, Brown Pelicans nearly disappeared from North America between the 1950s and the 1970s as a result of pesticide use.
The pesticide endrin killed pelicans outright, and DDT caused thin-shelled eggs that broke under the weight of incubating parents. By 1970, most North American populations, with the exception of a few in Florida, were gone, and the species was placed on the Federal Endangered Species List.
DDT use was banned in the United States in 1972, and populations have rebounded since that time.
Their growing abundance in the U.S. since the banning of DDT represents a conservation success story.
The total U.S. population size now exceeds historical levels, the number of breeding pairs in most states is stable, and Audubon Christmas Bird Counts and USGS North American Breeding Bird Survey data show increases. The birds were removed from the Endangered Species List in the southeastern United States in 1985; however, endangered status has been retained throughout the remainder of its range.

---new item--

RIO GRANDE DRY FOREST

---new item--

COASTAL OAK MOTTE

---new item--

What is an Estuary?
Estuaries exist all along the Texas coast. These partially enclosed areas of water are fed by freshwater rivers and streams, as well as ocean water. This mixture of fresh and salt water is what form an estuary.

---new item--

MIDDLE COAST

---new item--

GLASSELL:
THE GAME-FISH HERO
While Alfred Glassell, Jr. was a
altute businessman, he spent
lot of time pursuing large species of game fish. Never daunted by a challenge, one of Glassell's favorite species to target-fish was the Black Marlin, just because they were so difficult to hook and land compared to other 'bill fish' such as other species of marlin and sailfish. He
caught well over 30 Black Marlin in Cabo Blanco, Peru, and at least four of these were over 1000 pounus
SPORTS
Glassell fished other areas Tor black
Marlin besides Cabo Blanco. He caught nearly 30 Black Marlin off the coasts of Panama, Ecuador, Colombia.Glassell also fished the Indian Ocean for this species, since they were rumored to be larger in that region. In 1960 he took a fishing boat targeting the marlin, voyaging from Ceylon (south of
India) all the way to Mombasa
Kenya (east Africa), but only caught 3 small, unremarkable Black Marlin.
grishing with
Hemingway
and Glassell
Classell was a generous philanthropist, and helped
form the Cabo Blanco Fishing Club in the 1950's, which made fishing
naecibio in this realon MarDoni!
the best fishing grounds for Blach Marlin. The record 1560 pound fish displayed here was filmed and used for the footage in the 1958 film
The Old Man and the Sea, starring Spencer Tracy as the fisherman
Rooks and maio
haon written about
Glassell the great
in August 2013 he was honored by the Peruvian government,
when they ran a special stamp to commemorate the 60th anniversary
or his record Martin

---new item--

CYCLOTRONS: THE WORKHORSES
Electromagnet
D-Shaped Cavity
Particle Source
Spiral Beam Path
Cyclotrons accelerate charged particles
outwards from the center of a cylindrical vacuum chamber along a flat, spiraling path. The particles are accelerated by a rapidly oscillating electric field and are held in their trajectories by a magnetic field.
Today, cyclotrons are predominantly used for medical imaging and radiation therapy.
Target
Oscillator
Electromagnet

---new item--

LINACS: STRAIGHT AND TO THE POINT
Radiofrequency Cavity
Particle Source
Straight Particle Beam
Target
Linear accelerators, or LINACs, are machines that accelerate charged particles like protons in a straight beam. By carefully flipping electric fields in a series of chambers called radiofrequency cavities, LINACs push and pull particles to very high speeds.
Today, LINACs provide particle beams for medical radiation and are often the starting point for particles injected into large circular synchrotrons.

---new item--

THE SUBATOMIC FAMILY

---new item--

FRONTIERS OF SCIENCE presented by The Gordon A. Cain Foundation

---new item--

THE DOUBLE SLIT DEMO

---new item--

GUTS & TOES

---new item--

THE MYSTERY IN THE MIDDLE OF PHYSICS
General Relativity describes the smooth and predictable physics of very large scales. Spacetime tells matter how to move, and matter tells spacetime how to curve.
A massive object curves space.
Deflection
Light object moving on a geodesic
WE HAVE A PROBLEM..
These two pillars of physics do not agree with each other.
Will we find a theory of everything that unites them?
Quantum Mechanics describes the jittery and unpredictable physics of very small scales. The ground floor of reality is a weird place where things can be in two places at once, behave as both waves and particles, and exist and not exist simultaneously.

---new item--

NANOTECHNOLOGY & METAMATERIALS

---new item--

WHAT'S IN A NAME?
THE MODERN FIELD OF CHEMISTRY DERIVES ITS NAME FROM THE OLDER TERM "ALCHEMY." THE EXACT ORIGIN OF THIS WORD IS UNCERTAIN. ONE POSSIBILITY IS FOUND IN THE ARABIC AL-KIMIA, AL- MEANING "THE" + KIMIA, POSSIBLY FROM THE LATE GREEK KHEMIA ("TRANSMUTING METALS"), OR POSSIBLY EGYPTIAN (COPTIC) KHEM ("FERTILE BLACK SOIL"), OR POSSIBLY THE CHINESE KIM-IYA ("GOLD-MAKING JUICE").

---new item--

Alchemy in Action

---new item--

CAN YOU FIND THE TOOLS OF THE ALCHEMICAL TRADE?
FILTRATION FUNNEL
Achemists Worked With DitS of matter
far too small to manipulate with needles and tweezers. When they needed a way of separating substances by particle size, they turned to filters. By running substances through different kinds of filter media, they could catch particles above a certain size.
BALANCE SCALE
When alchemists really got serious, they needed a way to make quantitative analysis of their experiments, keeping track of how much their reagents weighed before going into reactions and comparing
that weight With reaction Proaucts
Luckily, the balance scale had been around for quite some time in the evaluation of currency.
FLAME LEST APPARATUS
Early experimentalists discovered that when metals burn, they emit different colors of light. The so-called flame test allowed alchemists to figure out which elements were handful of metals were known, they could be easily identified by the color of their flames. For example, copper salts burn green, while sodium burns yellow.
MORTAR AND PESTLE
A bowl-like mortar paired with a pestle for pounding-both made róm hard materials such as granite— were used to grind up solid reagents. Crushing chunks
of material into line powuer greatly increased the surface area available for interesting reactions.
COPPER STILL
Some alchemists designed a distilling apparatus made of copper or ronze, fashioned so that, as the bottom vessel was gently heated, the top could be cooled with water or ice. This allowed alchemists to distill substances more efficiently using gentler heat.
CRUCIBLE
Crucibles are small metal or ceramic vessels made for withstanding the high heat, rapid temperature changes, and caustic reactions occurring inside furnaces. By heating the ore within them to molten-hot temperatures, alchemists could separate metal from slag. Then, using specialized crucibles made of bone ash called cupels, alchemists could separate base metals (which reacted with the cupel) from heavy, noble metals like gold, silver, and platinum.
FURNACE
Every alchemist's workshop requires a way to heat up materials.
Heating substances can change their physical state, increase the speed of reactions, and provide the initial spark of energy that gets a reaction going in the first place. Refractory furnaces used bellows to inject oxygen in order to achieve the high temperatures needed to smelt metals, while chambered furnaces could drive off oxygen and heat up reagents in its absence. Sand or oil baths atop these furnaces could be used to heat delicate mixtures evenly.
ALEMBIC
Separating mixed substances from one another was one great challenge facing alchemists. They figured out that some substances have different boiling points than others. An alembic is an assembly of glassware designed to make use of this difference in volatility to distill substances. After heating the base, the more volatile substance vaporizes hirst and condenses in the cooler neck, eventually
• collecting in the second vessel.
ALCHEMICAL INVENTIONS
Alchemists might not have understood the chemistry behind their experiments, but the tools they invented in their quests for riches and eternal life actually worked. These inventions-from glass-blown distillation vessels to specialized furnaces-allowed them to handle the elements with new precision and paved the way for chemistry.

---new item--

THE ORIGIN OF CHEMISTRY
CENTURIES BEFORE THE PERIODIC TABLE, THE ELEMENTS FASCINATED GREAT MINDS AROUND THE WORLD. PEOPLE SEARCHED FOR CRYPTIC SECRETS IN METALS, ACIDS, OILS, AND ORGANIC MATTER, SLOWLY UNLOCKING THE TRUE NATURE OF NATURE. THESE ARCHAIC EXPERIMENTERS LAID THE EARLIEST FOUNDATIONS OF MODERN CHEMISTRY, AND GAVE THE FIELD ITS NAME.
WELCOME TO THE WORLD OF ALCHEMY.

---new item--

MAN- MADE
Scientists create specialized, man-made materials
from natural elements.
PLYWOOD IS CREATED BY STACKING AND GLUING
THIN WOOD SHEETS.
THROUCH CHEMICAL FROCESSES ANO DISTLATION.
TRANSFORMING THEIR HYDROCARBON MOLECULES.
COMEN BEM WITH POL MENST FROM MIXING
ALLOYS WITH SPECIFIC DESIRED PROPERTIES ARE PRODUCED BY COMBINING VARIOUS METALS IN DIFFERENT PROPORTIONSDIFFERENT PROPORTIONS.
CERMET USED IN ELECTRONICS, CUTTING TOOLS, AND OTHER APPLICATIONS, IS OBTAINED BY FUSING CERAMICS AND METAL

---new item--

SYNCHROTRONS: THE HEAVY LIFTERS
Main Ring
Bending/Focusing Magnets
Booster Ring
Synchrotrons are powerful particle accelerators that use a circular ring and strong magnets to bend charged particles into a closed-loop circular path. Radiofrequency cavities provide energy boosts, allowing particles to reach ultra-high speeds.
Synchrotrons produce intense beams of radiation used for various scientific experiments, including materials analysis and structural biology.
Particle Beams
Particle Collision

---new item--

TURNED TO STONE
The Chemistry of Fossilization

---new item--

ANATOMY OF A PARTICLE DETECTOR: INTERIOR
Hadron Calorimeter
Superconducting Solenoid
Iron Yoke Interspersed with Muon Chambers
Electromagnetic Calorimeter
Silicon Tracker
Human to Scale
Each layer of a particle detector is designed to pick up different kinds of particles.
Electron
Proton
Photon
Neutron
Muon

---new item--

GIANT PALM FROND, SABALITES AND FISH, DIPLOMYSTUS AND THE SMALLER KNIGHTIA
Eocene, Green River Formation, Lincoln County, Wyoming
HMNS 432

---new item--

THE STRELLEY POOL STROMATOLITES
PRECAMBRIAN | 3.4 - 2.5 BILLION YEARS AGO
Fossils of stromatolite mounds are found across the globe.
In a few spots, such as Shark Bay in Western Australia, microbes are still constructing stromatolites today.
Western Australia's Strelley Pool Formation is one of the best-known locations for uncovering stromatolite fossils.
Although it is hot and arid now, paleontologists and geologists believe that the Strelley Pool was once the floor of a shallow ocean, where stromatolite-forming microbes would have thrived. There, seawater would have kept the mounds moist while sunlight could still penetrate deep enough to allow photosynthesis.
Because oxygen was so scarce at the time the Strelley Pool stromatolites were formed, some paleontologists believe microbes based their metabolism on sulfur, instead. One by-product of sulfur-based metabolism is the mineral pyrite, also known as "fool's gold."
Mixed among the dark sandstone and fossil microbes in the Strelley Pool are crystals of fool's gold, supporting the theory that early microbes based their metabolism
on sulfur.
Did you know?
Because stromatolites resulted from some of Earth's earliest life forms, NASA studies these ancient structures for clues about possible life on faraway planets.'

---new item--

STROMATOLITES
Nearly 3.5 billion years ago, the air on earth lacked the oxygen to support most modern-day plants and animals. The oceans were extremely acidic, and the Sun's ultraviolet light was powerful enough to kill most of today's living organisms.
Despite these dismal conditions, life appeared, survived, and evolved
How did Earth's earliest life forms succeed?
Earth's earliest life forms were tiny one celled creatures, much like today's simplest bacteria. Some of these microbes began building multi-layer mounds called
"stromatolites,"
structures that still exist today and
resemble giant, upside down egg cartons.
Each stromatolite layer was formed by living microbial mats. New layers trapped particles of silt and minerals until the structure had dozens or even hundreds of layers.
Stromatolite layers filtered out most of the sun's deadly UV rays and allowed the microbes that comprised them to flourish.
How did the earliest life forms get energy and food?
Earth's early life forms couldn't operate like most modern bacteria or higher animals, because there wasn't enough oxygen.
Some based their metabolism on sulfur, instead. Modern sulfur-based bacteria thrives in dark habitats where oxygen and UV light are scarce, like swamps and even inside our own intestines.

---new item--

THE GREAT OXYGEN EVENT PRECAMBRIAN | 2.2 BILION YEARS AGO
Many microbes make do without oxygen. But what we think of as "higher" life forms could not evolve until there was enough oxygen in the air and water. When did the necessary oxygen arrive? Iron-rich sediments give us a hint.
If there is a lot of oxygen in the environment, iron becomes oxidized (think oxygen-ized) and rusts. About 2.2 billion years ago, a type of sediment called Banded Iron Formations, or "BIFs," became common.
BIFs have layers of iron-poor sediment alternating with iron-rich layers. Something was generating oxygen, but what was it?
The most likely answer is blue green microbes called cyanobacteria. Although small and simple, cyanobacteria evolved the chemical equipment to perform photosynthesis. Photosynthesis generates oxygen, so when cyanobacteria multiplied, they could have generated enough oxygen to change the Earth's water and air chemistry.
This ancient blue green bacteria was the single-most important step in making the air and water right for the evolution of higher life forms.

---new item--

HIGH-TECH CELLS EVOLVE
The First Eukaryotes
PRECAMBRIAN | 1.4 - 1.2 BILLION YEARS AGO
Eukaryote cells
We've got oxygen, now what?
Bacteria and similar microbes have a simple cell design.
They contain no energy units, no central nucleus packed with genetic material, and no other specialized mini organs for cellular functions. Without these bells and whistles, bacteria cannot evolve big, complex shapes.
Eukaryotes are life forms with a key set of mini organs, called organelles. All animals and plants today-from amoebas to elephants, algae to redwood trees- are eukaryotes.
Most simple microbes reproduce by division. All the new cells have virtually the same DNA, like little clones of the original.
The earliest eukaryote could it better; when it reproduced with another eukaryote, their DNA combined. The result was a eukaryote with an entirely new, distinct
DNA combination.
This kind of reproduction enhances diversity and speeds up evolution. Individuals whose DNA lets them survive best and reproduce fastest take over in a process known as natural selection.
Fossils prove that by 1.2 billion years ago, eukaryotes had evolved the cellular equipment to build complex body shapes, but wouldn't for another 800 million years.

---new item--

SEA-ICE SPREADS ACROSS MOST OF THE WORLD'S OCEAN PRECAMBRIAN | 700 MILLION YEARS AGO
GONDWANA
THE PRECAMBRIAN WORLD
A worldwide ice age struck the Earth about 700 million years ago, and likely killed most of the Earth's evolving eukaryote species.
How do we know?
Thick ice leaves behind strange, isolated rocks. As ice sheets flow over the land, they pick up hunks of rock and often carry them all the way into the ocean. As icebergs melt, the rock within them drop to the ocean bottom.
These dropstones stand out like geological sore thumbs.
The size of the stones and their make-up don't match the
fine silt and mud of the sea bottom around them.
Dropstones were spread all over the ancient ocean sediment, and the bottom mud turned dark—a sure sign of low oxygen. Most eukaryote species probably died.
Was that the end of evolution?
Fortunately for us, no. When the ice melted, life forms recovered and made a momentous leap in diversity.

---new item--

THE ENCHANTED GARDEN OF EDIACARA
Ediacoran Sea Bottom
Early Cambrian Sea Boffom
While the world waited for complex life forms to evolve, living structures remained simplistic. At most, microbes built mats of living tissue or mounds of layered sediment,
That changed in the Vendian Period with the appearance of highly organized anatomical forms: beautiful foot-tall plumes, ornamented saucersized disks and strange, segmented wrigglers. It was the Garden of Ediacara.
Some of its organisms, like Charia, resembled plants, while Dickinsonia resembled a starfish relative or wide-bodied bug.
Only a few Ediacarans seem to have had the power of active movement. Spriggina had a rounded head and tuered, segmented body well suited for wriggling.
Perhaps it was an ancestor of jointed worms, or shared an evolutionary path with the most famous creatures of the next Period: the trilobites?
We can't be sure, but we know that the Ediacarans conquered shallow seas across the globe.
The layers of boffom red are undisturbed
layers churned by worms,
© Peter Trusler
Their world was extraordinarily peaceful. The sea-bottom mud was undisturbed thanks to great mats of microbes, which were constantly creating new protective layers.
Spriggina and other mobile Ediacarans moved in two-dimensions across the mats, but no species had evolved the strength to break through the mat barrier.

---new item--

TRILOBITES
Trilobites, also affectionately called mudbugs by many paleontologists, are hard, segmented arthropods that existed more than 500 millions ago in the Earth's ancient oceans. They ruled the Paleozoic Era, going extinct before the first dinosaurs ever appeared.
They're incredibly important to the fossil record for a number of reasons. They existed on all continents, and they were some of the first creatures to exhibit the kind of complexity that was the foundation for life today.
Trilobites were incredibly diverse, with the smallest-known species measuring under a millimeter and the largest being over two feet long. More than 20,000 different species have been described, and we are lucky to have one of the most complete collections of these fascinating creatures in the country.
THE HIDDEN BOOM
540 million years ago, cactus worms began disturbing the peaceful world of the Vendian by burrowing into the muddy bottoms of shallow seas across the globe. Just a few million years later, Earth's oceans were swarming with a huge variety of soft-bodied swimmers. Soft body parts are rarely fossilized, so the vast majority of life in the Cambrian sea was virtually unknown until 1909, when paleontologist Charles Doolittle Walcott discovered the fossils of the Burgess Shale in British Columbia, Canada.
In the shale was an array of fossilized soft body forms, and Walcott discovered strange examples of nearly every phylum that exists today. Since that time, similar Cambrian fossil beds have been found in the Wheeler Shale of Utah, in the Chengjiang Formation of China's Yunnan Province, and in other areas around the world.
More than 170 species have been identified from the Burgess Shale, and many of these animals and plants have been recreated in this animated Cambrian sea aquarium. See how many you can find.

---new item--

TRILOBITES
Enrollment
Trilobites had another tendency that might remind you of a modern insect —the pill bug. As a mode of defense, trilobites were able to enroll themselves into a hard, impenetrable ball using their flexible thoracic segments.
This shielded the trilobites soft appendages and vulnerable ventral, or bottom, surface. Then, a trilobite could watch and wait for conditions to improve. When enrolled, many more elaborate trilobites displayed discouraging spines to would-be predators.

---new item--

TRILOBITES
Lifestyles/ Movement
Burrowing
Although most trilobites dwelled at the sea-bottom, crawling over sand and mud, some burrowed using shovel-shaped growths on their heads. Burrowing trilobites were usually scavengers, ingesting the mud and silt itself to feed off of the organic material contained within, much like an earthworm. Others burrowed to hide, intercepting passing prey at the mud's surface.
Swimming
Although trilobites' chunky little bodies don't resemble the streamlined bodies of swimming Olympians, some trilobites did manage to traverse via water. Swimming trilobites had narrower bodies and likely fed either by filter-feeding or as predatory hunters. Many of the smallest trilobites were swimmers, living close to the water surface and floating about like plankton.
Scuttling
Most trilobites scuttled around the sand on the sea bottom, leaving distinctive and important trace fossils in their wakes that have helped scientists track their movement, speed and even feeding habits.

---new item--

TRILOBITES
Eyes
Ci ystallization
What do Trilobites and B-17 pembers have in common?
Both use crystal for their optical equipment. Most trilobites had compound eyes with hundreds, or even thousands, of small lenses. Each lens was one perfect crystal of calcite, with the c-axis aligned to let light pass through with minimal distortion. Trilobite compound eyes worked well for detecting movement. Many insects today use similar compound eyes, but none of them build lenses from single, perfect crystals.

---new item--

TRILOBITES
Eyes
Types
Trilobites that lived in layers of debris and algae, like those in the genus Neoasaphus, had eyes on the end of long stalks so they could peer up around for danger.
Some specialized trilobites, such as Agnostus, were entirely blind, while others developed and secondary blindness. Bottom-feeding trilobites had no use for eyes in deep, dark water, and some species' eyes were reduced and eventually lost.
Some trilobite eyes grew so large that they dominated the creature's body and allowed it to attain a 360-degree field of vision. Opipeuterella is an example.

---new item--

ECHINODERM HIGH-RISES
Most Cambrian echinoderms were low and squat and fed on food particles mixed in the mud. These low-life echinoderms could not reach higher to harvest the food floating in the currents above.
In the Ordovician, echinoderms with stalks revolutionized the Ordovician ecosystem. Sea lilies-or crinoids - developed tall stalks made from long columns of crystals that carried the main body far above the sea bottom.
Here, the animals could filter out food in the currents, and soon sea-lily forests covered huge areas of sea bottom.
The Ordovician sea-beds were the first to have multi-story feeders-below the bottom, on the bottom, and on stalks high above the bottom.

---new item--

TRILOBITE KILLER: Anomalocaris
The earliest trilobites wore spiked armor, because there was danger overhead: Predatory Anomalocaris swimming above the Cambrian sea bottom.
Anomalocaris grew to be up to a yard long. It was bigger and stronger than any early trilobite. Swimming legs worked like propellers that drove the predator through the water, making it one of the speediest animals in the Cambrian ocean. This hunter had long, strong arms with joints that let it reach out and grab prey. Spikes could hold trilobites and other struggling victims.
Where does Anomalocaris fit in the family tree of life? jointed legs suggest it was some sort of arthropod, a distant cousin of trilobites and crustaceans such as shrimp.
Anomalocaris didn't have any hard, sharp teeth in its mouth, so how could it bite through trilobite shells?
Perhaps it ripped prey apart with its arms and then swallowed the pieces. We know that something was eating trilobites, because we find fossil feces chock full of broken trilobites.

---new item--

CRYSTAL-SKIN WONDERS
The Echinodermata
All echinoderms belong to the Clan of the Starfish.
All have a flexible, armored skin studded with calcite crystals, each specially shaped to fit into the armored shell that protects the echinoderm's internal organs.
To make the crystal extra hard, echinoderms add magnesium to the calcite.
This crystal skin also helps the attachment of muscles and tubes full of liquid. These tubes make a complete hydraulic power system. Pulses of liquid move the arms, legs and other body parts, so the echinoderm can walk, burrow, or even swim.
Starfish are the most famous echinoderms today, but there were dozens of other kinds that evolved in the Cambrian and Ordovician.

---new item--

TRILOBITES
Growth
Trilobites grew by molting, much the same way a modern-day cicada does. Like many arthropods, trilobites grew by shedding their hardened exoskeletons, which they did several times during development. When a trilobite outgrew its exoskeleton, it shed by arching its body, splitting its facial structure apart and emerging from its old skeleton— a sequence that has been captured in the fossil record

---new item--

LIFE BEFORE THE DINOSAURS II:
The William Stout Paleozoic Mural for the Houston Museum of Natural Science
The Houston Museum of Natural Science commissioned famed paleontology artist William Stout to create a work which illustrated the history of life during the Paleozoic era. This artistic rendering was enlarged to create an anchoring grand motif for our 1992 Hall of Paleontology, entitled "Life through Time." The original paintings have never been publicly displayed.
The murals illustrate successive time periods in vignettes depicting ancient environments and the extinct life that best defined them. The scenes representing the different time periods in this mural are:
Carboniferous: The Age of Coal Mississippian: Flooded by the Seas Pennsylvanian: A Changing World Permian: The Age of Contrasts

---new item--

TRILOBITES REVEAL THE LOST KINGDOM OF AVALONIA
In the Carboniferous and Permian periods, the globe was spectacularly different than it is today. Instead of having continents spread all over, with wide oceans in between, there was just one single supercontinent called Pangaea. Two great subcontinents existed Laurasia, made up of present day North America and Eurasia, and Gondwanaland, composed of present-day South America, Africa, India, Australia and Antarctica. On a fine vacation in the Carboniferous or in the Permian, you could walk from Houston to Rio de Janeiro, then over to Nairobi, farther east to New Delhi, and on down to Sydney.
But how are scientists able to piece together how continents came together and fell apart? With the help of our little friends, the trilobites. In the early 1800s, fossil hunters uncovered a trilobite mystery.
A genus of large trilobites called Paradoxides had a strange distribution: Specimens were found across Massachusetts, Georgia, Wales, and Morocco, but none in Ohio, Nevada, Russia or China.
It didn't make sense. Like crabs and lobsters today, trilobites probably avoided deep water and would have spread by hugging the coasts. So how could Paradoxides go from Boston to Morocco but not traverse the shallow seas covering the American Midwest or Eastern Europe?
It wasn't until the 1960s that geologists discovered that our continents had sailed around the globe, crashing into each other to make super-continents and then ripping back apart. Shallow-water creatures like Paradoxides helped scientists map out ancient continents that vanished long ago. Paradoxides had lived along the coast of an ancient continent, Avalonia, that was smashed between North America, Africa and Europe during the creation of Pangea. Bits of this lost continent-and its fossil record of Paradoxides-were left stuck on the coasts of these modern-day continents when they drifted apart during the Age of Dinosaurs.

---new item--

DEVONIAN DISASTER
Massive Extinction Among Reefs, Shallow Water
TRILOBITES, AND GIANT ARMORED FISH
Reef-Builders Hit Hard
Early Devonian reefs flourished wherever there was shallow sea water. Tabulate and rough-horn corals helped build the reefs, assisted by stromatoporoid sponges. Trilobites lived in the reefs as cephalopods swam above, and brachiopods attached themselves to the reef and to the bottom mud.
Devonian reefs were so large and widespread that they controlled ocean currents in many shallow water habitats. Today, oil-geologists search for buried reefs with exploratory drilling, and their remains continue to pour out millions of barrels of fossil fuel.
How did these reefs die? Tabulate and horn corals suffered a deep fall in diversity, as did the stromatoporoids sponges.
Trilobite Catastrophe
In the Late Devonian, trilobites suffered the greatest die off in their history.
Since the Cambrian, the trilobite family tree had developed a dozen main orders (major evolutionary units containing a multitude of families), each one with a distinctive style of eyes, spines, bodies and tails. Despite some Ordovician extinctions, Devonian trilobites were rich in variety. But the End-Devonian Extinction cut down every single trilobite order except one.
Brachiopods suffered extinction at the same time, and so did cephalopods.
Apex-Predators-Panzer-Sharks Gone!
The End-Devonian crisis came in waves spaced out over about 10 million years. The first blows came against the reefs and the invertebrates. Then, late in the period, the biggest, most advanced predators died out completely.
Panzer-sharks like Dunkleosteus achieved their greatest size and ferocity and then disappeared. All the armor-plated placoderm fish died out.
Titanichthys had evolved from a Dunkleosteus relative to become the first giant swimming plankton-eater.
Titanichthys disappeared at the same time Dunkleosteus went extinct. The ocean ecosystem had lost two of the most important feeding categories: Huge filter-feeders and apex predators.
THE SEARCH FOR THE END-DEVONIAN KILLERS
Was it Ice?
Glaciers were appearing in Gondwanaland, and the southern ice age was getting more severe. Perhaps cool ocean water killed some ocean systems.
Pollution From the Land?
Woodlands evolved rapidly at the end of the period, and rivers and streams became clogged with vegetable debris during the rainy season.
Plant roots also helped break down rocks and change hard minerals into soft clays. In heavy rains, runoff carried tons of mud and silt into the watercourses and could have suffocated the reefs with organic detritus.

---new item--

A DEVONIAN RIVER
Two giant "panzer sharks," Dunkleosteus, do battle in the shallow water of a Devonian river. Early trees such as Archaeopteris, with their fern-like leaves, stand in groves along the riverbanks, creating some of the Earth's first forests.
While the first lonely tetrapods were trying out their limbs on land, Acanthostega probably stayed in the water most of the time, using its four limb-like fins to push itself through the tangle of fallen branches below.
Dunkleosteus was the biggest swimmer in the Late Devonian waters, growing to more than 30 feet long.
It belonged to a group of early jawed-fishes called placoderms (meaning plate-skinned). By the end of the Devonian, they were all extinct.
Painting by Julius Csotonyi.

---new item--

THE AGE OF GIANT FISHES
DEVONIAN / 408 - 360 MRA

---new item--

HOW TO BECOME FAMOUS FOREVER
Have a new species named after you
One of the most recently discovered trilobite species, Lichakephalus stubbsi, has a special Museum connection.
At 38 centimeters, it's unusually big for a trilobite, and the specimen is quite well preserved. Nearly all the bumps and grooves in the head and body are visible.
It was excavated from an Early Ordovician locality in Morocco, North Africa and is of the genus Lichakephalus. A genus is a group of closely related species; Lichakephalus includes two. L. erbeni was, the first lichakephalid species, named in 1955. And now we have L. stubbsi, named in 2012 for Mr. Samuel Stubbs, a longtime Museum supporter and member of our Committee on Paleontology.
The species name, stubbsi, is Latin for "belonging to Mr. Stubbs." Stubbs' fascination with trilobites began as a child when he found a small specimen in a gravel pit. He went on to study trilobites seriously and spent 40 years building up a private collection. It is one of the best trilobite collections in the world, and Mr. Stubbs has generously donated it to HMNS.

---new item--

BONY FISH
Pioneering paleontologists of the early 1800s gave the Devonian Period an apt name: The Age of Fishes.
Fish-like creatures had evolved much earlier-back in the Cambrian and Ordovician— but most were small and none were strong swimmers. As the Silurian ended and the Devonian began, fish evolution erupted into dozens of new and dynamic forms.
The coelacanths are muscular relatives of the lungfish, and were the inspiration for the classic horror film Creature from the Black Lagoon. Coelacanths became diverse and common throughout freshwater and saltwater environments in the Devonian and afterwards. They thrived during the days of the dinosaurs in the Triassic, Jurassic and Crelaceous Periods and two species still survive today virtually unchanged - Latimeria chalumnae and Latimeria menadoensis.
When the first coelacanth fossils were named and described in the mid 1800s, these ancient fish were assumed to have gone extinct at the end of the Cretaceous. In 1938, the coelacanths were re discovered when a living specimen was discovered in a fisherman's catch in South Africa.
A second species was identified in 1999. Coelacanths are considered to be living fossils, having evolved to their present form approximately 400 million years ago.
Along with their relatives, the lungfish, and the tetrapods, coelacanths are lobe-finned fish, the first fish to emerge on land. Lobe-finned fish are characterized by their paired fins, which are joined to the body by a single bone. The pectoral and pelvic fins of lobe-finned fish would evolve into the legs of the first amphibians.
The "main lines" of bony fish also appeared early in the Devonian: Cheirolepis represented the line of ray-finned fish that would evolve into trout and salmon, tuna and mackerel, and most of the rest of today's fish.

---new item--

LIFE CONQUERS THE LAND
In freshwater ecosystems, much of the food is supplied by trees and bushes. Fish eat parts of leaves, branches, bark and stems, along with a variety of bugs that feed on the plants.
For the first 300 million years of the Paleozoic, there was little plant life on land. And as long as there were no forests on land, ecosystems in lakes and rivers were poor.
The first land plants evolved in the Silurian Period, about 420 million years ago. By the Mid-Devonian, 390 million years ago, the first trees with woody trunks appeared,
Then evolution sped up. Dense forests of woody troes spread in the late Devonian.
When abundant food arrived on the land, opportunities opened to new species that evolved the organs needed to survive out of water. Air could dry up delicate gills, but some gill-breathers successfully made the transition.
One group of sea scorpions modified their "book gills" to become "book lungs" and became land scorpions. Then come the carliest insects.
Meanwhile, several clans of fish had evolved lungs.
The evolution of amphibians- the earliest vertebrates with legs-occurred in the Devonian. The lobe-finned fish Eusthenopteron had lungs and powerful fin bones equipped with well-formed joints at shoulder, hip, elbow and knee. Complicated leg muscles let Eusthenopteron walk across shallow pond botfoms and push through areas with dense water plants.
Acanthostega evolved from a Eusthenopteron-like ancestor. It retained gills, but its legs were even stronger.
Instead of finny feet, Acanthostego had genuine toes shaped much like today's frog toes. Acanthostega and its relatives were amphibians--creatures who were born in the water but could move over land as adults.
Amphibian necks were evolving, too, Lobe-finned fish had no real neck-the head was aftached directly to the forso. But Acanthostega had special joints belween shoulder and head, so the animal could poke its head up through the water to look around.

---new item--

CRINOID-STARFISH SYMBIOSIS
A rapid burial preserved this specimen in a rare snapshot
of inler species interaction.
The crinoid and starfish displayed were entombed 340
million years ago, and olhough ot first glance their
relationship may appear to be between predator and prey, it's actually much more intimate.
This particular species of starfish, Onychaster Rexilis, is frequently found attached to the crinoid species
Actinocrinites gibsoni and other similar species
The relationship is symbiotic Actinocrinites' exdended
anal tube ollows the starfish to easily feed on the
crinoid's excrement.

---new item--

WAR BETWEEN THE SHELFISH
The Unsolved Mystery of the "Brachs"
These Are Not Clams
Brachiocods ruler the sea botom for 300 million years.
Today they are ecological fugifives; unless you night dive in the tropics, you will probably never see one alive. Brachiopods are rare and secretive, and they are outnumbered by clams 1,000 to one.
Why and how clams replaced brachiopods the end of the Paleozoic is a huge paleontological mystery.
It's What's on the Inside that Counts Brachs and clams have less in common than you'd assume. Clams have feet; brachs don't. Clams can move, brachs are immobile. Clams can dive; brachs can't. Many clams can dig holes in the mud and pull themselves to safety. Most brachs attach to the sea botom, vulnerable to hard biting predators. Both filtered food, but clams were faster.
Evolutionary Prediction
One might reasonably conclude that brochs should starve, or be killed by predators that clams escape
But fossils soy otherwise. Brochs and dams coexisted for 300 million years, and all the while brachs kept on evching - even producing more species than clams did

---new item--

LIFE IN THE CARBONIFEROUS FORESTS
The richest Carboniferous beds looked like a modern day peat bog, with plant parts piled up in dark sediment.
However, the plant species in the Carboniferous didn't match what we see in today's bogs.
Today, flowering plants are the dominant clan, even in swampy, boggy sites. Grass, most bushes, trees, and all the flowers belong to the flowering-plant group. But not a single fossil from a flowering plant could be found in the Carboniferous. Instead of trees with flowers, Carboniferous habitats were full of giant, tree-size relatives of today's ground pine and horsetail reeds - primitive plants that do not produce any sort of flower.
Another strange plant group in the Carboniferous were the seed ferns. Seed ferns grew into tall trees that carried big leaves shaped like fern fronds.
True ferns never produce seeds, but use tiny spores for reproduction The Carboniferous seed ferns did something never seen today: they combined fern-like foliage with complex seeds.
Fossil animals tell a similar story. Carboniferous coal beds preserved many forms of arthropods with jointed legs. Spiders, millipedes, centipedes and scorpions were abundant, and some were huge in size. Late Carboniferous dragonflies had wingspans almost a yard across, and some spiders were as large as wolves. But the insect groups that are most common and varied today are absent. The Carboniferous had no ants or bees or wasps. And beetles —the clan that produces more species than any other today-didn't exist, either.
Carboniferous forest
Painting by Julius Croton
The Carboniferous had no "advanced" vertebrates.
There were no dinosaurs, birds, mammals, snakes or frogs. Instead, Carboniferous meadows and wetlands hosted many amphibians - species that were born in the water and used gills to breathe as many salamanders do today.
Still, Carboniferous amphibians differed in profound ways from amphibious species alive now. Modern salamanders have naked, moist skin. Many Carboniferous amphibians had thin bone scales covering the entire body, and some were as big as crocodiles —far larger than any amphibian species today.
In the Middle Carboniferous, something new and wonderful evolved —the first reptiles. Reptiles laid air-breathing eggs on land, and the young hatched without any sort of gill. At first, the reptiles were tiny.
But in the later Carboniferous, several lines of reptiles got bigger and bigger.

---new item--

PANGAEA
CARBONIFEROUS - PERMIAN | 300-200 MILLION YEARS ACO
In the Carboniferous and Permian Periods, the globe was spectacularly different. Instead of having continents spread all over with wide oceans separating them, there was just one single supercontinent: Pangaea.
Fossil Plants and Glacial Deposits Map out
Two Great Subcontinents
Laurasia-North America and
Eurasia combined
The coal swamps were full of seed-ferns. The fossilized wood has few growth rings, indicating that the climate was warm all year round and the tree trunks grew without interruption by cold winters. A great variety of reptiles and amphibians swarmed over the forests and swamps.
Gondwanaland-South America, Africa, India, Australia and Antarctica combined
Dropstones from floating ice bergs and other glacial sediments prove that a major ice age was in full force.
THE PERMIAN WORLD
Fossil Compasses
A great mass of evidence comes from geophysics, as well, Paleo-magnetism is the fossil record of where ancient continents fit along a northsouth gradient.
During the Carboniferous and Permian, Gondwanaland continents extended far into the cold southern lafitudes
Putting the Pieces Together
In the Carboniferous and Permian, North America was joined to Eurasia and Africa collided into the east cocat of North America, South America rammed our Gulf Coast. South America and Africa were united and joines to Australia, India, and Antarctica. Wherever these collisions occurred, mountain ranges were pushed up.
Result: Pangaea
On a fine vacation in the Carboniferous or in the Permian, you could walk from Houtton to Rio de Janeiro, then over to Nairobi, fanher east to New Delhi, and on down to Sydney

---new item--

LYSOROPHID
The Permian amphibian Lysorophid liked to curl up to escape the beating sun during aestivation- a dormant period similar to hibernation, but brought on by high temperatures and arid conditions. During the rainy season, lysorophians reemerged to mate, reproduce and begin the life cycle again. Unfortunately for these lysorophians, the rains never came. They remained entombed and are preserved here in their entirely.

---new item--

THE HISTORIC CRADDOCK RANCH IN SEYMOUR, TEXAS AND THE HMNS PALEO TEAM'S DISCOVERIES
The North Texas Redbeds preserve the best samples of land vertebrates frem the Early Permian, Skeletons there were buried by spring floods when rain in the mountains washed mud and sand down onto the low plains.
Fossil Ballistics-Prehistoric CSI
We use fossil footh crowns as paleontological "bullets" to tell us who attacked whom. Dimetrodon and other amphibians and reptiles grew new tooth crowns all their lives. Old teeth were forced out by new teeth growing up, and once the root of the old tooth dissolved, the crown fell out.
HMNS' Paleontology Team has discovered hundreds of Redbeds "bullets," and these can help us discover what
Dimetrodon ate.
One big surprise. Dimetrodon ate xenacanths, the venomous spined swamp sharks.
Xenacanths were unusual sharks. They didn't have a normal shark tail. Instead, they had a long, pointed triangular tail, a shape we see today in fish that swim forward and backward through swamp vegetation.
Xenacanth teeth had tiny double-fangs. The real defense was the long saw edged spine attached to a swivel at the back of the head. The swivel spine had a long groove running up from the base-evidence that there was
a poison gland. Many of today's sharks have poison spines on their dorsal fins.
A big xenacanth shark would be a dangerous target for any meat-eater, but ballistic evidence shows that Dimetrodon attacked these formidable fish regularly.
We find many shed Dimetrodan teeth with chewed-up xenacanth skulls, backbones, and fins.
Dimetredan also ate many of the "Soggy Bottom Boys"
- flat bodied, bottom hugging amphibians, Shed Dimetrodon teeth have been excavated with dozens of
damaged skeletons of Diplocaulus and Trimerorhachis.
Did Dimetrodon eat the big herbivore, Diadectes?
Yes, We find pulled apart Diadectes skeletons mingled with Dimetrodon tooth crowns.
Did Dimetrodon eat the fin-backed herbivore, Edaphosaurus?
Not often. Most of the edaphosaurs dug by the HMNS Paleo Team were buried in stream deposits without any Dimetrodon shed teeth
How did edaphosaurs escape the predator?
Perhaps the fin-backed herbivore was a good swimmer and could dive and hide in rivers and streams.

---new item--

FIN-BACKS FILLED THE ROLE OF APEX PREDATORS
Finback legs were longer and faster than those of any other big animal of the time, so they could catch any prey that didn't hide in a burrow or dive underwater.
Fin-backs had spike-like fangs up front for killing and a long row of short, sharpedged teeth toward the rear of the jows for slicing meat. The dual armament gives the creature its scientific name: Di-metro-don means "two sizes of teeth." Dimetrodon is the most famous fin-back and the most common. The North Texas Redbeds have given the world more Dimetrodon bones than all other locales put together.
Saw-edged Fangs and Meat-slicers
Take a close look at these Dimetrodon fangs. The front and back edges have a saw-toothed pattern, excellent for stabbing through connective fissue in animal hide and for penetrating muscles and tendons. The low posterior teem were sawedged as well. When Dimetrodon pulled its lotter faw backwards, the long row of meat-slicers worked like a chain saw to cut apart a big carcass.
A big Dimetrodon could dismember even a Diadectes or an Edaphosaurus in a few minutes.

---new item--

WORLD'S OLDEST VEGETARIAN POOP?
The HMNS Paleo Team discovered Diadectes tracks next to strange fossilized feces (coprolite). This petrified poop isn't shaped like that of a carnivore. Instead, it's a coiled pile of cylindrical feces. The material is smooth and homogenized, like a vegetable puree. This 285 million-year-old fossil may be the oldest fossilized excrement from a specialized herbivore.

---new item--

REPTILES BEGIN TO TAKE OVER
Here is a fossil track from the Texas Redbeds. Note the blunt tips of the toes. It's an amphibian track from a panzer-mudpuppy.
Here is another Redbeds track. See the difference?
There are sharp claws on the tips of all five toes. This fossil must be from a reptile.
In the Carboniferous Period, reptiles invented a spectacular reproductive device - the amniote egg. This egg is laid on land and breathes air, not water. Once reptiles had evolved the amniote egg, they began to explore the dry-land ecosystem.
By the beginning of the Permian, reptile families were evolving fast, expanding and acquiring new ways of extracting food from terrestrial realms.

---new item--

THE LIFE OF THE CRADDOCK
BONE BED
Four species of fin-backed predators lurk around this Early Permian pond, which the HMNS Paleo Team uncovered on the Craddock Ranch in northern Texas.
The finbacks are early mammal relatives. They are hunting their favorite prey, the venomous-spined xenacanth shark. The big Dimetrodon with the split fin is our finback, nick-named "Willi." To the left, the predatory amphibian Eryops emerges from the water with a boomerang-headed amphibian, Diplocaulus, in its jaws. Trimerorhachis and Diplocaulus hug the pond bottom, burrowing into the mud for safety, while the slender little reptile Araeoscelis perches above the pond in the branches of a seed fern belonging to the gigantopterid family. Two dragonflies known as Meganeuropsis-among the largest flying insects in the history of life-hover overhead.
In the background on the left, the plant-eating finback Edaphosaurus browses horsetails growing near a quiet river channel. In the dryer uplands in the distance on the right, the big terrestrial amphibian, Diadectes, dines on conifer branches.
Painting by Julius Csotonyi.

---new item--

ARMOR-PLATED "FROG-OIDS" OF THE PERMIAN SWAMPS
Here is an archegosaur, a swimming amphibian from the Early Permian. Also affectionately called "Hoppy Puppy," this specimen is exceedingly rare. Look at its bally: Bone scales in the shape of thin rods give the animal a flexible armored vest. Smaller scales covered its upper body parts.
Body armor helped the archegosaur resist the fangs of other amphibians and the jaws of big coal swamp fish
Archegosaurs were at home on land or in the water. The sinuous body and tail were excellent for swimming while short, strong legs were effective for walking on land.

---new item--

REDBEDS CSI-TWO-STAGE BURIAL
How did all these skeletons get buried together?
A major clue is that all the bones are from adults or young adults.
What event would bring adult amphibians together but keep babies and juveniles away?
Frogs and salamanders today often crowd together to court their mates. It's usually adults-only. Youngsters stay away so they don't get trampled.
Somehow, a multitude of mating mudpuppies died near their mating grounds. Their bodies rotted away, but snouts, foreheads and chest armor became fossilized.
Here's a puzzle:
We found very few thin, light bones-hardly any ribs, vertebrae, legs or toes. Why are there only big bones in the deposit?
The clue is in the sediment.
Sand and gravel covered the bones, which would have been carried by a strong current. Lighter bones, like ribs, leg-bones, and toes, got washed away along with the lighter sediments.
Thanks to a little flood, the "Judy Block" captures the joy, excitement and tragedy of ancient amphibian love.

---new item--

SOGGY BOTTOM BOYS:
BOTTOM-HUGGING AMPHIBIANS
The Largest Fossil Sample Ever Dug from the Texas Redbeds!
What you're looking at is a fragment of the "Judy Block," named for North Texas native and ranch owner Judith Whitley. Dozens of fossil skulls and chest armor are mingled together in this flood-deposit. All are from a new species, a close relative of Trimerorhachis. We call these flat-headed amphibians "panzer mudpuppies," because their chunky limbs and stout bodies look like those of today's mudpuppy salamanders. But, like most Permo-Carboniferous amphibians, they had bone scales embedded in their skin.
The world's largest find of Redbeds amphibians was made by bulldozer operator James Smajstrla of Baylor County, Texas. Smajstrla was excavating a water tank for cattle on the Craddock Ranch in Seymour, Texas, but first needed a detailed survey of the site.
Dr. Robert Bakker, curator of vertebrate paleontology at
HMNS, combed the outcrop for three days searching for fossils, but found none.
There were no fossils on the surface, but when Smajstrla dug 10 feet he spotted some odd-looking rocks.
At 12 feet, Smajstrla hit a layer of red rock jammed full of petrified heads, shoulders, and chests. The bones were so delicate that the crew had to soak them in super glue before they crumbled into dust.
Museum curator David Temple led a team of volunteers who chipped out the 6-ton block. The combined efforts of cowboys, farmers, ranchers and museum volunteers rescued the giant slab of precious petrified relicts - bringing them to light for countless future generations to see.

---new item--

DEATH ASSEMBLAGE OF TRIMERORHACHIS
Skuty Bock" haoment
Early permian
Arron Formation
Baylor Counts, Texas
HMAS field collection made possible with the support of Bill and Judy Whitley of the
Cradfock Ranch and the Cockiell Foundation

---new item--

DIPLOCAULUS SKULL
The boomerang-shaped head gives this amphio-ion the nickname of
"Boomer-head".
Just
ike many of the other Permian amphibians. its saull was protected by bony armor. The distinc-five boomerang shope develops over time.
Juvenile Diplocaulus start showing small curves in the boomerang shape. As they grow, the boomerang shope becomes larger and more defined. it is hypothesized that the skull was used as a weapon to fight off other Diplocaulus as well as to attraci mates.

---new item--

REDBEDS CSI-TWO-STAGE BURIAL
How did all these skeletons get buried together?
A major clue is that all the bones are from adults or young adults.
What event would bring adult amphibians together but keep babies and juveniles away?
Frogs and salamanders today often crowd together to court their mates.
It's usually adults-only. Youngsters stay away so they don't get trampled.
Somehow, a multitude of mating mudpuppies died near their mating grounds. Their bodies rotted away, but snouts, foreheads and chest armor became fossilized.
Here's a puzzle:
We found very few thin, light bones —hardly any ribs, vertebrae, legs or toes. Why are there only big bones in the deposit?
The clue is in the sediment.
Sand and gravel covered the bones, which would have been carried by a strong current. Lighter bones, like ribs, leg-bones, and toes, got washed away along with the lighter sediments.
Thanks to a little flood, the "Judy Block" captures the joy, excitement and tragedy of ancient amphibian love.

---new item--

FEEDING TIME FOR GORGONS
Two powerful early mammal relatives, gorgonopsians known as Inostrancevia, fight over the possession of a downed dicynodont in this Late Permian stream.
Painting by Julius Csotonyi.

---new item--

THE "TIME OF THE GREAT DYING" END PERMIAN| 252.28 MILION YEARS AGO
That's the name given to the Permian-Triassic transition by the great American paleontologist Carl Dunbar, of Yale University.
It was the most devastating extinction event to hit the salt-water ecosystem. Clans of species that had dominated the ocean bottom for 200 million years suffered terribly, and some 97 percent of species were eliminated.
Search for the Permian-Triassic Killers
Was there just one cause for the die-offs?
A Poisonous Burp?
Poisonous gases can get stored deep in the sea bottom and in some lakes. Particularly dangerous is methane inside loose molecular cages called "clathrates." Was seo-bottom methane suddenly released into the sea water and the atmosphere? That hypothetical methane cloud could have spread across the land surface, choking plants and animals
Lava Flows?
Lova flows can poison the ecosystem. All the gas and dust can cause global cooling.
Volcanic emissions can also add to a greenhouse effect, if heat coming from the land is tropped in atmospheric gases.
Spread of Deserts?
The globe was getting hotter and drier in the late Permian.
We know this because dryland sediments, sand dunes
THE PERMIAN-TRIASSIC WORLD
and red soils, were spreading. Salt deposits grew in shallow seas where summer evaporation concentrated the brine.
Did terrible dry seasons kill land creatures? Did high salinity destroy salt-water systems?
Oxygen Crisis-Suffocating Sea Bottoms
Take a look at the world map at the Permian-Triassic event: There is a unique configuration of continents.
A giant ocean, Tethys, was enclosed by the northern continents (Laurasia) and the southern continents (Gondwanaland). When a piece of present day China, the Cathaysian Bridge, wedged itself at the east end of Tethys, the circulation of this interior ocean was cut off from the world ocean.
Tethys became stagnant. Bottom-water was fouled by rotting bodies of sea-creatures.
Did Tethys burp its poisonous load and exterminate life forms with hydrogen sulfide and carbon dioxide?
Unsolved Mystery
We still don't know for sure what cause or combination of causes were responsible for The Great Dying.
However, we do know that these extinctions altered the course of life history in ways that would ultimately produce the Age of Dinosaurs and, ultimately, our own modern world.

---new item--

THE TIME OF THE GREAT DYING END PERMIAN | 252.28 KYA

---new item--

THE WORLD'S FIRST SABER-TOOTHS
Big gorgons, like our Inostransevia, were true saber-tooths who evolved 220 million years before the first saber-toothed cats. Their upper fangs were longer than the lowers, and the gorgon could do what the saber-toothed cats who came much later could do: open their mouths so wide that the upper fang could slash prey like a sword.
Inostransevia also used its neck to add power. The neck vertebrae were long, and the neck muscles were strong enough to swing the entire neck and head down during the attack.
Some gorgons were as small as badgers. Others were as big as polar bears. All were pure carnivores. Gorgons had no molar-like teeth in the back of the jaws to chew vegetables. All the fangs and front teeth were saw-edged for cutting tough hides and flesh.
It looked as if nothing could stop the gorgons, but the Permian-Triassic extin a event did. All gorgons, large
and small, died out c mlete. y-

---new item--

ARCHOSAURS TAKE OVER
TRIASSIC / 250 - 200 MYA

---new item--

PETRIFIED WOOD
Schideria
Colbrook NavalD Court, Afzona, UST
Gift of Joan R. and Herbert A. Zunl

---new item--

THE TRIASSIC PREDATOR FROM POST, TEXAS
Postosuchus, the apex predator of this Triassic ecosystem, tries to negotiate the spiky armor of the plant-eating archosaur Desmatosuchus. One of the Earth's first dinosaurs, the little meateater Chindesaurus hurries off into the shadows of the horsetails.
The amphibian Koskinonodon peers out of the water on the lower left, while an early mammal, Dromatherium, scurries up a big horsetail stalk. In the foreground, the reptile Hypsognathus emerges from his burrow.
The small pterosaur Eudimorphodon soars overhead, with the ancient forest of Agathoxylon in the distance.
Painting by Julius Csotonyi.

---new item--

SPIKE-SHOULDERED HERBIVORE
Desmatosuchus
Not a Dinosaur!
The thick, out-turned pinkie toe gives away the true identity of this spikey archosaur. Desmatosuchus was an advanced crocodile relative and a close kin of the carnivorous Postosuchus.
Evolution is predictable. Usually herbivores evolve from. carnivores, as chewing and digesting plants is much harder than digesting meat.
Remember back in the Early Permian? The herbivore Edaphosaurus came from an ancestor like the predsion:
Dimetrodon. Triassic croc-oid archosaurs were evoy so quickly that we'd expect herbivores to appeal a short order.
Desmatosuchus and its kin are the most success the early archosaur plant-eaters. The ribcage bre extremely wide, providing space for the long, complicaied intestines needed for dealing with plant fibers.
Desmatosuchus' legs were rugged, short, and strong, well-suited for the heavy work of excavating. It could use its upturned snout to root for underground vegetables.
This archosaur was too slow to run away, but had complete back and belly armor for protection.

---new item--

DOUBLE PENGUINS
The Speedy Plesiosaurs
Hare is a cast of Mary Anning's 1823 discovery, Plesiosaurus dolichodeirus,
lesiosaurs swam fast and maneuvered nimbly wing their strong flippers, Each Hipper was like a penguin wing, sweeping backward to "Ily" underwater, Hesiosaur shoulder and hip bones were shaped like giant plates that supported muscles for the denmard and upward strokes.
Today, penguins are among the speediest oceanie predators. Plesiossurs were as quick or even quicker, because they had two pairs of wings,
Fossilized gut confents tell us exactly what Early Suressie plesiosaurs ate. Fish scales and hocks from the orns of squid-like belemnites are jommed in te stomach and intestines. We can deduce plesiosaur oftock methods from the head and neck design. Eyes faced up and forwerd, meoning the plesiosaur would approsch a scheel of fish or squid from below and behind. This wey, the predator woule be hard to see.
The plesiosour would choose its target, bend its neck berkewread and then thrus its jows. fo long, curved fangs wood impole the slippery prey

---new item--

THE EARLY JURASSIC OCEAN
The mother ichthyosaur, Stenopterygius, swims through a grove of dangling sea lilies called Seirocrinus, showing her seven youngsters how to make a meal of the giant cephalopod Harpoceras. Below, an early marine crocodilian, Steneosaurus, considers snacking on one of the ichthyosaur babies. A fish known as Lepidotes swims near the sunny surface of this deep Jurassic sea.
A long-necked Plesiosaurus glides past in the background, pursuing a school of belemnites, while an Hybodus shark moves in from the right.
Painting by Julius Csolonyi.

---new item--

HANGING GARDENS OF SEA LILIES
Secilies (crinoids) - relatives of starfish and other. derms- filter small food items frone water
with their long, jointed arms.
*Nearly all sea lilies, living and extinct, lived near the sea bottom. The Holzmaden ocean was special: Long-stemmed sea lilies attached themselves to floating logs and let their bodies and feeding arms hang down into the still water. Some grew stems up to 50 feet long.

---new item--

ANCIENT CRAB TRACKS
These tracks record the last few feet of life for a horseshoe crab (Mesolimulus walchi.) This hapless creature-whose species has remained virtually unchanged over the last 450 million years— ended up trapped in a toxic lagoon, where the combination of a hot, tropical climate and limited water exchange with the ocean created an oxygen-poor environment. Evaporation also oncentrated saits in the water and created a hyper-saline layer near the lagoon. The conditions proved fatal to the horseshoe crab, but preserved its body from scavengers and decay.
Marks like these regularly occur in limestone and were interpreted as pterosaur footprints until examples of the horseshoe crab and its tracks preserved together were discovered.

---new item--

CROCODILES ON THE HIGH HOLZMADEN
Steneosaurus
Today, some crocodile species- especially the famous
"Australian Saltie" - still swim through the surf and travel to far away islands.
However, even salt-water crocs spend most of their time along lakes and rivers, where they feed and build their nests. Jurassic sea-crocs were much more adventurous.
They hunted far out in the open waters.
How do we know? Fossil Steneosaurus skeletons have been found in central Europe in the fine dark mud at the bottom of the Holzmaden ocean. Nearly all the other fossils found there are from creatures of the ocean, such as coiled ammonoids, sea lilies and squid-like belemnites.
Steneosaurus's body shape shows a high degree of commitment to ocean life. "Normal" crocs have long, strong front legs and can run at high speeds on dry land.
The sea-crocs have smaller, weaker front legs, not good for walking but excellent for steering while swimming.
Steneosaurus's underwaier propulsion came from its thick, muscular tail. When the animal swooshed its tail back and forth, it was propelled forward. To back up, the sea-croc used its large webbed hind feet.
Steneosaurus did keep one feature that had evolved in freshwater crocs: armor plate on its back and belly. The armor must have protected the croc from shark bites and from injury during croc-on-croc violence.

---new item--

EARLY CROCODILIAN
Steneosaurus bollensis
Early Jurassic, Toarcian Age
Baden-Wartembers, Germany
PV.1480

---new item--

JURASSIC MOTHERHOOD
We nicknamed this skeleton "Jurassic Mom." She was carrying seven unborn babies when she died and became fossilized. Can you find all seven? It's a bit of a trick question: one baby was caught in the birth canal.
Mother ichthyosaurs with later babies are commons al Holzmaden. Something co!
igh mortality in the
birthing season.
Big-Headed Babies
Most vertebrate babies seem big-headed compared to their moms, but fish-lizards go to extremes. The newborn Stenopterygius had a head that was as long as its body. When Stenopterygius grew up, the head would be only a third of its body length. Why?
The babies probably had to find food for themselves right away. A proportionately huge head and jaws would have permitted the youngsters to capture full-sized squid.

---new item--

REPTILIAN SHARK
The Ichthyosaur Stenopterygius
One of the most magnificent sea-reptiles was the
"fish-lizard" ichthyosaur. Advanced fish-lizards like this Stenopterygius achieved the highest level of adaptation to life in the open ocean. They spent their entire lives in the ocean and never came on land, even to lay eggs.
We can tell rom the tail shape that Stenopterygius was as fast as the fastest shark alive today. The tail fin was made of two narrow curved blades, one pointed up, the other pointed down. Great white sharks have tails of the same shape, and so do mako sharks and other speedy shark species. One difference: ichthyosaurs were upside-down sharks. The shark vertebral column bends up into the tail, while fish-lizard vertebrae bent down.
The ichthyosaur forelimbs were steering flippers-long, tapered and backswept. Since the hind limbs weren't needed for walking or for digging nests, they were greatly reduced.
Super Night-Vision
Advanced fish-lizards had huge eyes. Thin wedges of bone, arranged like a camera lens, reinforced the eyeball. Owls, eagles and many lizards today have similar eyeball-bones (known as sclerotic rings).
Equipped with hyper-vision, fish-lizards couts hunt in the dim depths or'at night. ry d
Teensy-teeth, Tweezer-jaws, Stomach Centents Fossil stomach contents leave no doubt about fish-lizard diets. Many ribcages are stuffed with squid hooks and squid shells. The jaws were quick snapping but delicate, and the teeth were small —ideal for capturing quick, squirmy prey.

---new item--

MOONFISH
Clam-Cracker, Reef Crusher,
Ancient Angelfish
Today's coral reefs are attacked by parrotfish and emperor angelfish. Although their bodies are beautiful, the strong jaws and teeth of these fish are deadly to other reef creatures. Their incessant nibbling eats away reef-building organisms and can even crack small clams and snails.
True parrotfish and angelfish are advanced species that had not yet evolved in Jurassic times, but there was a strong-jawed nibbler at Solnhofen: Gyrodus. Gyrodus had a deep disc-shaped body ideal for hovering in quiet water. Its jaws and teeth were so strong that few hard-shelled creatures could survive its bite.
To protect itself against ray-finned predators, Gyrodus used old-fashioned gar-type armor of thick, shiny scales.
This effective defense, combined with its dangerous mouth, made Gyrodus the "Panzer tank" of the Jurassic lagoon.

---new item--

A FAMOUS LIVING FOSSIL:
THE COELACANTH
The fish known as coelacanths are the most famous
"living fossils" in the world. Coelacanths disappeared from the fossil record around 80 million years ago in the Cretaceous Period, so scientists thought that they had gone extinct. That is, until fishermen hauled up living coelacanths from deep water near Madagascar.
In the Late Jurassic Period at Solnhofen, coelacanths were already an old erup, going back at least 370 million.$ years. Not only o these fish living fossils, they are also
cousins of the missing links between fish and amphibians.
The thick, muscular fins of coelacanths look a little like stubby legs; the ancestors of land animals with genuine legs were close relatives of early coelacanths.
Coelacanths illustrate the rule that ancient families can die out in fresh water and most areas of salt water but still survive in the ocean depths.

---new item--

COELACANTH
Coelacanth
Late Late Jurassic, Tithonian Age Solnhofen Lithographic Limestor Solnhofen, Bavaria, Germany
PV.1473

---new item--

RUDDER-TAILED 'DACTYL
Rhamphorhynchus
Bat-wings with Super-fingers
Pterodactyls first evolved in the Triassic, long before birds ocquired their wings. Instead of feathers, 'dactyls used bat-style wings of strong, elastic skin that stretched from the hand to the ankle.
Bats use four fingers to support their wing. 'Dactyls are simpler; the leading edge of the wing is connected to a single enlarged digit.
Breast-bones for Flight Power
Dactyls evolved wide breast-bones and enlarged flanges for the chest muscles that powered flight. Extra strength come from the hind limb, which flapped up and down with each stroke.
Leading-edge Flap and Tail-rudder
Dactyls evolved a "leading-edge flap," similar to what is seen on modern airplanes. A spike of bone on the wrist could tighten a narrow strip of wing skin along the front of the main wing and turn il up or down to manipulate lift and speed.
Rhamphorhynchus and other long-tailed dactyls had a rudder built into the tail. Long, thin bone rods stiffened when the tail muscles lightened, while other muscles near the hip could flip the tail in any direction.

---new item--

DINO-BIRD OR BIRD-DINO?
Allosaurs and other Jurassic carnivores had an unusual
body form, much different from the design lions and tigers and bears have today:
• The neck was bent into an S-shaped curve.
• The shoulder blade was long and slanted backward.
• The forepaw had just three fingers.
• The torso was short and compact.
• The upper hip bone was wide and squared-up.
• The hind leg was long and bent at knee and ankle, and the allosaur walked on its toes with its heels held high.
• The hind paw had three main toes, with a small toe facing inward and backward.
In fact, the design is much more similar to modern-day birds. Some small Jurassic predatory dinosaurs were even closer - with long, slender arms and fingers that matched bird wing proportions.
In 1868, Thomas Henry Huxley in Oxford and E. D.
Cope in Philadelphia concluded that all birds evolved from dinosaurs. And now we have conclusive proof that Huxley and Cope were correct.
Dinosaurs Are Not Really Extinct: Birds Are a Surviving Branch of the Dinosaur Family Tree Archaeoptery made headlines in the 1860s as a
near-perfect link between dinosaurs and birds. The fossil
showed large, complex flight feathers on the arms, but Archaeoptery also had teeth, three-fingered claws and a long, bony tail like an allosaur's.
The raptor-dinosaurs Velociraptor and Deinonychus, discovered in the mid 1900s, filled in more evolutionary gaps. They had longer arms and bigger brains than most other dinosaur species, coming close to the cranial capacity of modern birds.
In the 1990s, Chinese paleontologists studied and reported many skeletons of raptor dinosaur with feathers, such as Caudipteryx and Sinosauropleryx
So where do dinosaurs end and birds begin? It's a tough question, because so many dinosaurs acquired avian features. We know that the ancestor of today's birds was one of the many lypes of feathered dinosaurs evolving in the Late Jurassic.

---new item--

A JURASSIC WATERING HOLE DURING THE TITHONIAN AGE
A mother Stegosaurus prepares to defend her two youngsters from the toothy jaws of the great Jurassic predator Allosaurus. The meat-eating dinosaur is well aware of the dangers of the stegosaur's powerful, spiked tail.
Two long-necked sauropods, Diplodocus, among the largest animals ever to live on land, amble past in the background browsing the tender tops of the Araucaria trees.
Painting by Julius Csotonyi.

---new item--

PARROT DINOSAURS
Psittacosaurus
Early in the Cretaceous, hordes of parrot dinosaurs —the psittacosaurs— lived in China and Mongolia.
Not much heavier than a big turkey, psittacosaurs used their long, strong hind claws to dig burrows where they curled up to escape unpleasant weather. Some psittacosaurs fossilized as entire crèches - groups of youngsters who had hatched together, huddled side by side. Sudden floods buried the babies in a thick blanket of mud.
Head anatomy shows that adult male and female parrot dinosaurs had separate roles. Males had large horns sticking sideways out from below their eyes -armament probably used to scare away other males. Female skulls were smoother and smaller.
Parrot dinosaurs had, for their size, the strongest bite force of any dinosaur herbivore. Tall, strong beaks and enlarged jaw muscles let the psittacosaurs cut though hard-shelled fruit and tough leaves. At first sight, psittacosaurs, with their long hind limbs and short front legs, seem quite different from gigantic quadrupedal dinosaurs like Triceratops. But if you look closely at the psittacosaur beak, you'll see a clue to its close relationship.
Thanks to
Tony and Gaynor Banham
There's an extra beak bone at the front of the muzzle, an unusual development seen elsewhere in the big-horned dinosaurs.
Digestion was assisted by gizzard stones, or gastroliths
- hard pebbles swallowed by the dinosaurs and embedded in the muscular walls of the stomach.
Psittacosaurs were picky about what stones they picked up and ingested. They chose the hardest pebbles that would serve best as grinding stones.
When the stomach contracted, the stones crunched food items. Gizzard stones gave the psittacosaur a set of
"stone molars" that operated after the teeth in its jaws had finished chewing.
The use of stomach stones evolved across the archosaur family tree. Today, crocodiles and alligators have muscular gizzards packed with rocks, and so do many herbivorous birds. Several types of long-necked plant-eating dinosaurs used gizzard stones, as well.

---new item--

EARLY CRETACEOUS

---new item--

LATE CRETACEOUS LAND
On the far left, a duck-billed dinosaur known as Brachylophosaurus has died on the bank of a Judithian-Age river, which winds through forests of Metasequoia.
A tyrannosaur called Gorgosaurus, a small gharial-like archosaur known as Champsosaurus, and the early crocodilian Borealosuchus all move in to scavenge a meal, while the ostrich-like dinosaur, Struthiomimus, runs out of harm's way.
A few million years later, near a Lancian-Age watering hole, the bristled Triceratops "Lane" presents a formidable challenge to "Stan," the ferocious adult Tyrannosaurus rex. In the foreground to their right, the feathered dinosaur known as "Julieraptor" challenges
"Tazzie," the Didelphodon, over the possession of a tasty clam, while a big trionychid turtle plods toward them through the mud.
On the right, a mother Quetzalcoatlus hunkers down under the Taxodium trees, defending her nest from the marauding Tyrannosaurus rex, "Wyrex." The father Quetzalcoatlus storms in over "Wyrex's" shoulder.
Magnolia shrubs, some of the Earth's first flowering plants, grow in the foreground.
Painting by Julius Csotonyi.

---new item--

JUDITHIAN AGE | 79 -72 MYA

---new item--

THE KICKBOXING DINOSAUR
Deinonychus
The Fossils that Inspired Jurassic Park
Two carnivorous dinosaurs were responsible for inspiring the novel and popular movie Jurassic Park: Deinonychus and its close cousin, Velociraptor.
Both of these raptor-dinosaurs were smart, speedy kick-boxers. Their teeth were sharp, but too small to kill big prey. Instead, their main weapon was an enlarged claw mounted on the hind foot. The hind leg was by far the strongest part of the body-far stronger than the jaws.
Most predatory dinosaurs had claws with a flat bottom-surface, like an eagle's claw. Flat-bottomed claws are good for penetrating prey bodies and holding on. Raptor claws, in contrast, had a knife-like bottom edge that could cut a long wound.
Body design in raptor-dinosaurs made them three-dimensional fighters. The torso was short and compact, and the tail had special bone rods that made the entire tail flip sideways or upward when its muscles were contracted. Tail flipping provided balance when the raptor-dinosaur twisted and turned in mid air.

---new item--

THE RAZOR-BACKED HUNTER
Acrocanthosaurus
Early Cretaceous ecosystems had a new family of apex predators: the acrocanthosaurs. Short, strong fingers with meat-hook claws resembled those of jurassic allosaurs.
Inside the skull, though, were air-filled chambers connected to the lungs-clues to a kinship with the "shark-tooth dinosaurs" like Giganotosaurus, a giant meat-eater who starred in the novel Dinotopia.
When it needed to interact with others of its species, Acrocanthosaurus could head-butt with the low, rounded horns over its eyes.
It could also try to scare away other acrocanthosaurs by standing as tall as it could. That's where the "razor-back" design comes in. The vertebrae in the torso grew long, vertical spines that made the body seem higher and bulkier than it really was. Razorback hogs today use their tall spines to intimidate each other, as do American bison.

---new item--

CRETACEOUS TRUCK STOP
The Zerbst Trackway
1. Duck-billed dinosaur 2. Ornithomimid 3. Oviraptor 4. Bird 5. Tyrannosaurus rex
Lancian-Age rocks are full of bones, but tracks are a rare find. After a century of searching, fossil hunters had discovered only a few scattered footprints. Then in the 1980s, Wyoming rancher and sharp eyed dino-sleuth Leonard Zerbst discovered this trackway-the largest known assembly of tracks for the age.
The Zerbst track site didn't record just one species; here was a dinosaur gathering place where at least eight animals crossed a bed of moist sand within hours of each other. The track-makers represented five different species from four different orders. It was like a Lancian truck stop.
1. A lumbering duck-billed dinosaur, a plant-eater, walked slowly on its thickly padded paws, leaving three-toed tracks.
2. Lancian speedsters, members of the ostrich-dino, or ornithomimid clan, made long strides over the sand.
Their compact, narrow feet made distinctive three-digit imprints like those left by a modern-day rhea, a South American cousin of the ostrich.
3. Two super-rare oviraptors- perhaps a mated pair
- walked side by side on their long, narrow toes.
Unlike most other Lancian-Age dinosaurs, oviraptors had well developed inner toes that left clear imprints behind the three main toes.
4. Wading birds scooted by making tracks like the herons'. Several types of water birds had evolved by Lancian times. They resembled flamingos, herons and ducks in their foot shapes.
5. Giant three toed tracks with sharp claws could mean only one thing: Tyrannosaurus rex.
Why were so many species attracted to this one spot?
Perhaps there was a pool of fresh drinking water nearby.
Maybe it was a favorite place to roll in the mud and get rid of pesky insects.

---new item--

FOSSIL BLOCK FROM MARCHAND QUARRY
Tyrannosaurus rex was here.
A bonebed is defined as an aggregation of the skeletal remains, more than one individual found together. The most spectacular bonebeds contain the bones of hundreds, or even thousands, of dinosaurs. This is a portion of a bonebed that contains mostly fossils of duckbill dinosaurs.
On many occasions, after being excavated by paleontologists, the bones are separated by size and species, then reconstructed into mounted skeletons. Examples of this type of display include the two Edmontosaurus annectens on display in the Hall, which were reconstructed from bones excavated from the Ruth Mason bonebed. The bonebed on display here is preserved as it was discovered.
Look closely. There is another dinosaur hiding in this accumulation of fossils. Scattered among these fossils are the shed teeth of a Tyrannosaurus rex. Tyrannosaurs replaced their teeth throughout their lives, typically while feeding. Shed teeth would either fall from the mouth or become embedded in the bone or flesh of the dinosaur being eaten. Some of these

---new item--

CLASH OF THE TYRANTS
This tooth is from the left maxillary of a Tyrannosaurus rex. Shed, or broken teeth, are the most common T. rex fossils found. T. rex teeth would typically be lost while feeding on prey. T. rex had the most powerful bite force of any terrestrial animal in earth's history; this tooth bears witness to that fact. The attacking bite broke off the tooth below the gumline and grooves were cut into the enamel as a result of this face-biting attack.
Lance formation, Niobrara County, Wyoming
PV.2033

---new item--

WYREX
The Bobtailed T. rex
Number One in Pedal Paleontology
Tyrannosourus rex did two things especially well: bite and run. To understand the running part, we need fine feet, and the "Wyrex" in front of you has some of the best-preserved feet ever found.
Bird Toes
Both hind paws are nearly perfect. Though T. rex grew to be as heavy as an elephant, the toes look like standard bird toes —three main digits, the middie one longest, with a little inner toe facing inward. This ioe. design is excellent for running on oll soris of ground
- soft and hard. And it is top notch for grabbing tray and for kicking.
Best T. rex Hands
Our Wyrex skeleton has the best hands of Ri ever discovered. Count the fingers. There cre le
—thumb and forefinger—and a tiny vestige bi middle finger.
What good were the T. rex fingers?
Best theory: the weak claws were good for gentle stroking and tickling during courtship or for family bonding.
Bobtail
heck out Wyrex's tail. Something bit off the rear half. nosaur tails housed thick muscles that attached to the
thigh, making the tail part of the running apparatus. If Wyrex survived its tail-ectomy, it would have had to learn how to walk and run again. Look closely. The bitten tail bone shows little or no sign of healing, so the bite must have happened after death, or not long before.
Can you outrun an Angry T. rex?
Some scientists speculated that because an adult T. rex was as heavy as an elephant, it would also be as slow.
But Tyrannosaurus rex was not built like an elephant.
Tyrannosaurs of all species had the essential design features for high-speed running: huge pelvic and hind leg muscles, long slender ankles, and long shins.
A sure sign of slow runners is a short ankle. Elephant ankles are stubby and wide. Tyrannosaur ankles are twice as long, and the three main ankle bones are tightly wrapped around each other.
A T. rex could have run rings around an elephant. IC course elephants didn't exist when T. rex was alive, tyrannosaurs could run circles around all the big pl eaters of their time.)

---new item--

WIDE-SNOUTED DUCK-BILLED DINOSAUR
Edmontosaurus
Two centuries ago, great herds of American bison grazed the High Plains of Nebraska, South Dakota, and Wyoming. Sixty-five million years ago, massive herds of wide-snouted Edmontosaurus moved across hot, humid river delias that covered this same part of North America.
Edmontosaurs are the most common dinosaur dug on our continent. At a half dozen quarries, there are thousands of specimens-adults, adolescents and babies-all buried together.
The three skeletons here were all excavated from one edmontosaur bone bed, the Ruth Mason Quarry.
Drowned Multitudes?
What happened to preserve entire herds? The sediments these duck-bills are found in were once river sandbars. Perhaps a hurricane drowned the herd and piled up blankets of sand over the carcasses, or an epidemic killed thousands and then a spring flood buried the skeletons.
Low Mowers
All duck-bills were lowcroppers. Their backbone curved down at the shoulders, so the head was held close to the ground. With their wide, squared off beaks,
edmontosaurs could crop low-growing vegetation like dinosaurian lawn-mowers.
They pulverized leaves and branches with hundreds of curved "molars"
packed in together in the rear of the
mouth, like a carrot-grater.
Each "molar" had one side coated in hard enamel.
The rest of the tooth was softer dentine. As the entire chewing surface wore away, the enamel sides stuck up, making sharp edges. New crowns were growing in all the time.
The Only Thumbless Dinosaurs
Look closely at the forepaws. Duck-bills are the only thumbless dinosaurs. Scientists use this symbol for duck-billed dinosaurs. Can you decipher it?
Why did duck-bills lose their thumb in evolution?
Duck-bill ancestors were probably iguanodont dinosaurs-herbivores with a spike-shaped thumb useful for stabbing.
If duck-bills evolved a different defense, then perhaps they discarded the thumb spike.

---new item--

Edmontosaurus Skin
You're looking at the perfectly preserved skin impression of an Edmontosaurus, the same dinosaur as the two right next to it. The fossilization and mineralization of this particular specimen means that the impression is unusually durable.

---new item--

DUCK-BILLED DINOSAUR MUMMY
Brachylophosaurus
Some skeletons dug from Judith River sandsiones are more than just bones —they are mummies, These the-grained sandstones actually preserved portions of skin and other soft lissues, as with this Brachylophosaurus.
Dinosaur Hiking Boots
This is a 3D rapid prototype of the famous Judithian Age mummy, "Leonardo." Observe the scales on the forearm and ankle. These would have protected the dinosaur's legs when it moved through rough, prickly bushes. Scales over the ribcage are smaller, and along the midline of the neck and back are a row of scaly bumps.
Fossilized Dinosaur Stomach
Leonardo is an outstandingly well-preserved dinosaur:
Besides large areas of skin, the contents of the digestive tract have been preserved. These contents give us clues about the duck-bill's digestive process.
Leonardo Proves that the Old Theories Were
Wrong
Old theories held that duck-billed dinosaurs ate soft water plants. But microscopic study shows that Leonardo's stomach contains thousands of bits of leaves and conifer needles - proof that the duck bill used its jaws to chop tough plant parts.
How Could Skin Survive for 76 Million Years?
How did some Judithian dinosaur carcasses survive?
The mummification probably came in several steps:
Step One-Oversupply of Carcasses
Scavengers can't chew up every carcass. When hundred of duck-billed dinosaurs died in one event or dry seasor scavengers couldn't dismember all of them.
Step Two-Dry Out
Notice how the head is pulled back in this
Brachylophosaurus. This "death-posture," or opisthoton
comes when the back and neck muscles dry out and pull the head up. Once the hide was sun-hardened scavengers had a harder time biting through it, and it enty
carcass would be light enough to float.
Step Three-Bury Quickly and Deeply
When the rains came after a drought, dried-out be were washed down river and covered by thick lay of wel sand.
Even under these ideal conditions, dinosaur skin
tissue usually ro
Laway underground. However,
impression of the skin could be preserved in the as it hardened into sandstone.

---new item--

WHIP-TAIL TRIPODS
Diplodocus
The Jurassic was the Golden Age of vegetarian giants.
"Longnecks," formally known as sauropods, grew larger and larger until they reached 30 tons or more— as heavy as five normal-sized elephants.
No clan of land animals ever matched the bulk of the Long-necks.
What was their secret?
Sauropod necks were hollow and filled with air, like bird necks, so the beasts could swing the neck side-to-side quickly. To reach high in the tree-tops, long-necks went tripodal. Hind legs were much stronger than the fore legs, and the tail served as a third limb for balancing when the body tilted up.
Diplodocus was the ultimate tripod. Its tail was immensely strong, and its torso was lightened by hollowed-out vertebrae. When tipped up, the head could reach 25 feet. Close cousin Barosaurus could reach 36 feet.
With heads that high, the heart couldn't pump blood to the brain. No problem. The brain was tiny and could
function withour fresh blood for 10 minutes al a timo.
Long-necks didn't chew. Instead, they plucked branches off trees and passed the food down to their muscular gizzards, where hard rocks crushed and split the vegetable bits. Fossilized gizzard stones have been dug inside the ribcages of long-necks and their kin
For defense, Diplodocus had a giant bull whip. The last 30 feet of the tail were made from thin bone rods jointed together and encased in tough connective tissue. The powerful muscles at the front of the tail could swing the whip end with tremendous speed. A direct hit on a meat-eater's face would cause dreadful pain.
By the Late Jurassic, the dinosaur clans had expanded into a dozen families of plant-eaters, mostly long-necks.

---new item--

LANE
Triceratops MUMMY!
The Only One in the World
Triceratops is the world's No. 1 favorite veggie-saur, and it is one of the most dangerous land herbivores to have ever evolved.
Paleontologists thought we knew all there was to know about Triceratops, but this particular specimen, known as "Lane," made us reevaluate everything.
"Lane" is named for a member of the family that owns the ranch where this mummy was dug. Lane is an excellent skeleton with some of the best Triceratops feet ever discovered. The giant hind paw spread its four toes widely to give maximum traction on soft, gooey ground. The forepaw was five-toed and wide too. No doubt about it-Triceratops was a "mudder," a beast designed to tromp across swamps and bogs.
Lane's torso was ultra-compact and short front-to-back The barrel-shaped ribcage expanded sideways in the abdic en to hold a capacious gut.
Tiny-Tailed Wonder
For a dinosaur, Triceratops carried a tiny tail that curled down from the hips; no other clan of dinosaurs had reduced their rear appendage to such an extreme.
That posed a locomotive challenge. In most dinosaurs, the biggest muscle that attoched to the thigh came from the tail, so a wide, long toil was necessary for powerful movement.
A Triceratops would be at a disadvantage-unless an alternative muscle developed. Look at the lowertear hipbone (he ischiom). It is unusually strong and curves down. There is a muscle attached here that runs to the thigh (the adductor), Perhops Tricerotops developed an especially thick muscle here.

---new item--

STAN*
rannosaurus rex
Tyrant Lizard King
"Stan," nicknamed after his discoverer Stan Sacrison, was a vicious predator that lived 65 million years ago at the end of the Cretaceous Period. One of the largest land predators to ever live, Stan feasted on dinosaurs such as Triceralops and duckbilled Hadrosaurs. Excavated from a diff face 100 feet high and prepared by paleontologists from the Black Hills Institute of Geologic Research, the riginal specime', required more than 30,000 hours
› complete. Details of Stan's life experiences were eserved on his skeleton. Broker cir; healed ribs and a e at the base of his skull match the teeth f on another annosaurus. The bite, which missed his spinal cord an inch, was not the cause of death; it had begun to / when Stan died.
ng with a Dinosaur
nivore's teeth are usually sharp for cutting meat pone or tearing a skeleton into smaller pieces.
Stan's teeth show him to be a carnivore, but his teeth are not meatslicing sharp." They are strong, with a thick, D-shaped cross section.
The tooth sticking out of a T. rex's jawbone is only the tip of the iceberg. The root of the tooth is hvo or three times larger than the crown and securely anchored in the jaw. Blunt teeth are not intended to remove meat from bone, but rather to tear flesh from prey in manageable chunks. As a Tyrannosaurus rex bit its prey, its powerful jaw muscles would push its teeth into skin and muscle until they struck bone. With a lew swift jerks and a headshake, the T. rex would tear off the flesh. Then, the Tyrannosaurus would point its massive head skyward and, with the help of gravity, move the lump of chewed muscle down its throat.
What's for Dinner?
Triceratops and Duck-billed Hadrosaurs

---new item--

LANE
Triceratops Skin in 3-D
Dinosaurs Leave a Good Impression
Evidence of Cretaceous dinosaur skin is surprisingly common. Dozens of duck-billed dinosaurs have been preserved with impressions of the skin surface pressed into the layers of sand and silt around them. But those fossils are only impressions; the real skin tissue rolled away, leaving what we call a dermal fingerprint.
Actual 3D fossil skin, with the tissue petrified, is almost completely unknown. Certainly no paleontologist ever hoped to find a Triceratops with its hide intact. That is until 1998, when Wyoming rancher Leonard Zerbst noticed a fossil horn sticking out of a hill. Zerbst called in his friends at the Black Hills Institute- experts in excavating big, delicate fossils. In 2002, the field crew dug a deep hole and discovered a Triceratops skull.
At first Lane didn't seem to be a big deal - just another T'tops head. T'tops skulls litter the West, and hundreds have been excavated.
But then someone looked up at the ceiling of the excavation. A strange pebbly texture covered the rock.
Impressions of skin surrounded much of the skeleton.
Lane possibly had the most complete set of T'tops skin impressions ever found, and the skin fextures were beautiful and surprising.
On his flanks, Lane had big, circular scales with a circle of smaller scales all around the periphery. Under the throat were rectangular scales. Under the belly were Chex-style scales.
Lane was hauled back to the lab in Hill City, South.
Dakota and tregied with extra care. Then the second
shoe dropped: There was more than just impressions.
There were great swathes of petrified skin tissue several inches thick.
Lane debunked everything we thought we know about how a live T'tops looked. Paleontologists had assumed that Triceratops and other horned dinosaurs were naked, with skin covered in thin scales. Lane said otherwise. The big, round scales on his flank were like mini-volcanoes in shape. At the conter of each one was a raised protuberance, which had a hole in the top that went deep into the skin. Clearly, when Lane was alive, something grew out of that hole. Something like a long, coarse bristle.
Our Triceratops likely had hairlike or feather-like bristle, which fits exactly with a primitive early relative of
Triceralops —Psillacosaurus.
Several of the Psittacosaurus fossils dug from the famous
feathered dinosaur lakebeds of Liaoning Province in China had preserved skin. One extraordinary specimen, which you can see in the Early Crefaceous section, had a cluster of bristles growing oul of its tail.
Other primitive herbivorous dinosaurs have showed up with bristle-feathers as well, so, we can conclude that bristliness was an old feature in the family tree.
Why grow bristles? Maybe they served as body whiskers, which would have helped the T'tops run through the dense woods on dark nights. Maybe they were used in courtship dances. We don't know for sure yet.

---new item--

CRETACEOUS TAZZIE
Didelphodon
There is only one skeleton in the world of the ferocious furball that lived with T. rex-and you're looking ot it.
Known technically as Didelphodon, this marsupial mommal has been misinterpreted by paleontologists for a century.
Textbooks say that it was merely a big opossum, but our new skeleton proves that Didelphodon had the face of a Tasmanian devil combined with the body and tail of a river otter. Pound for pound, the Fazzie was the most powerful creature of Cretaceous rivers and lakes--the terror of clams, snails and baby alligators.

---new item--

JULIERAPTOR
In the Cretaceous, raptors came in all sizes:
Extra Small:
Microraptor was no bulkier than a big pigeon.
Small:
Bambiraptor was as large as a crow.
Medium:
Velociraptor, star of Jurassic Park, was as heavy as a coyote.
Large:
Deinonychus grew to wolf-size.
Extra Large:
Utahraptor was a heavyweight, as hefty as a lion.
Here "Julieraptor," a new species of small raptor, is screeching at a Cretaceous "Tazzie."
Raptors all were smart, with expanded forebrains that allowed some higher-level thoughts. Long fingers tipped with sharp claws let small raptors scamper through bushes and trees. Feathers on arms and legs could be spread out for long, gliding leaps.
The raptors' most dangerous weapons were curved sharp hind claws. Julieraptor probably attacked lizards and most of the furry mammals of the Late Cretaceous, but not the aggressive Tazzies.
Cretaceous Tazzies and small raptors chased each other and co-evolved all through the last 20 million years of the Cretaceous.

---new item--

GIGANTO-DACTYL
Quetzalcoatlus
Quetzalcoatlus and its close kin were the greatest flying creatures to ever evolve. Thirty-five feet from wing-tip to wing-tip, Quetzals were far wider than the California condor and many times heavier. Aeronautical engineers were stymied by Quetzals when they were first discovered; their body mass simply seemed too big to fly.
But fly they did. The upper arm had huge bony flanges for the flapping muscles. Hind legs added power.
Like a bat, the wing was attached to the hind leg.
Quetzalcoatlus was not a mere passive glider; it could and did engage in active flight.
They were quick on the ground, as well. Quetzal legs were exceptionally tall, and they likely moved like giant versions of bats. They could gallop along the ground to catch prey, or get a running start for take off.
The evolutionary fate of giant 'dactyls was tied to the dinosaurs and the great sea-reptiles. When the Cretaceous Period ended, they all died out. Many birds survived, but not one bird would ever achieve the magnitude of the great Quetzalcoatlus.

---new item--

BUCKY
Tyrannosaurus rex
"Bucky" is a sub-adult Tyrannosaurus rex of the robust (female) morphotype. The original bone quality and preservation is excellent. The excavation was done by Black Hills Institute in 2001 and 2002 and required an enormous amount of resources, as the skeleton was scaftered over opproximately 2,000 square meters and buried under as much as 10 meters of overburden.
Bucky has a nearly complete vertebral column to the end of the pelvis, the third most complete tail of any I. rex knowm and an excellent rib coge, complete with gastralia basket (belly ribs). The addition of the gastralia basket enhances the visual perception of the dinosaur and better outlines the shape of the body, The skull is a scientilic reconstruction which unlized modified casts of Dully (another subadult T. rex) and other T rex specimens.
auce it in toge odes comboy and render, Baky Define, who
The Five-ton Bloodhound
The movie furassic Pack teaches us dist if elgred by o
T. rex, obe should stand enf so ornat dese tian
In foct, even if it were blindlolded on a moonless night,
T. rex could locate a person from a mile away by scent!
We can tell which sense was strongest in T. rex by Xroying the inside of the skull. The sensory regions of the brain and nerves going to and from the brain show up as canals inside the divisions of the braincase bones.
Sight: The nerves coming from the eyeballs were large, so vision was excellent.
Mearingt The sensory concis in the inner ear were medium sized, so hearing was good for most sounds.
But faint, high-pitched sounds would have been difficult for a T. rex to delect.
Smell: Here's where the T rex really excelled. The nerves coming from the sensory region of the nose were stupendous. Tyrannosons had a sense of smell better than two dozen bloodhounds combined IF it were alive today, a 1, rex could be trained to recognize a thousand different people with just ore whill

---new item--

GIGANTO-DACTYL
Quelzalcoatius
Quetzalcoatlus and its close kin were the greatest flying creatures to ever evolve. Thirty-five feet from wing-tip to wing-tip, Quetzals were far wider than the California condor and many times heavier. Aeronautical engineers were stymied by Quetzals when they were first discovered; their body mass simply seemed too big to fly.
But fly they did. The upper arm had huge bony flanges for the flapping muscles. Hind legs added power.
Like a bat, the wing was attached to the hind leg.
Quetzalcoatlus was not a mere passive glider; it could and did engage in active flight.
They were quick on the ground, as well. Quetzal legs were exceptionally tall, and they likely moved like giant versions of bats. They could gallop along the ground to catch prey, or get a running start for take off.
The evolutionary fate of giant 'dactyls was tied to the dinosaurs and the great sea-reptiles. When the Cretaceous Period ended, they all died out. Many birds survived, but not one bird would ever achieve the magnitude of the great Quetzalcoatlus.

---new item--

SUPERFAST GIANT SEA TURTLE
Archelon
You con tell how fast a sea turtle con swim from the flippers. The fastest swimmers hove the longest flippers in relation to their chell size, in the lote Crelaceous shallow seas, Archelon and its kin had the fastest body plan and the longest flippers. And these turtles had their shell weight reduced even more than their so wer relatives, Toxocholys
Archelon was one of the largest turtles to evolve in the history of life and could weigh up to 2 tons. The giont head carried a long, hooked beak that could bite fish In half or crack big ammonites.
A specimen on display at Yale is evidence that even these colossal turtles had dangerous enemies: One hind paddle had been bitten off by a predator, perhaps a shark or a large masasaur.

---new item--

JULIERAPTOR
In the Cretaceous, raptors came in all sizes:
Extra Small:
Microraptor was no bulkier than a big pigeon.
Small:
Bambiraptor was as large as a crow.
Medium:
Velociraptor, star of Jurassic Park, was as heavy as a coyote.
Large:
Deinonychus grew to wolf-size.
Extra Large:
Utahraptor was a heavyweight, as hefty as a lion.
Here "Julieraptor," a new species of small raptor, is screeching at a Cretaceous "Tazzie."
Raptors all were smart, with expanded forebrains that allowed some higher-level thoughts. Long fingers tipped with sharp claws let small raptors scamper through bushes and trees. Feathers on arms and legs could be spread out for long, gliding leaps.
The raptors' most dangerous weapons were curved, sharp hind claws. Julieraptor probably attacked lizards and most of the furry mammals of the Late Cretaceous, but not the aggressive Tazzies.
Cretaceous Tazzies and small raptors chased each other and co-evolved all through the last 20 million years of the Cretaceous.

---new item--

NORTH
AMERICAN CRETACEOUS
AND OCEAN
stupendously large sea turtle Archelon nips the flipper le mosasaur Tylosaurus, while another mosasaur, the platecarpus, is intent on chomping the smaller sea e, Toxochelys. Meanwhile, the smaller sea turtle eyes possibility of cracking a tasty clam buried in the sand.
i the lower left, the "panzer squid," Baculites, shoots et of ink at the predatory fish Ichthyodectes. Two ge ammonoids, Placenticeras, swim near the bottom
• the right.
oral and kelp grow along the sandy bottom of this nny Cretaceous sea.
ainting by Julius Csotonyi.

---new item--

Plioplatecarpus
Plioplatecarpus is a mosasaur that shows the classic hallmarks of lizard head construction. The skull behind the eye socket is wide open — in life, this region was filled by jaw muscles. The bone that connects to the lower jaw, the quadrate, is free to wiggle and swing, allowing the animal to adjust how the lower teeth bit into prey.
A typical dinosaur like T. rex has a stiffer skull. There's a strong bony strut that connects the bones under the eye to the rear of the head. The quadrate can wiggle, but not as much as a lizard's. And T. rex carried the extra snout holes of archosaurs— one in the muzzle and one in the lower jaw. Lizards never have these holes.
Mosasaurs evolved from a land-living lizard that looked like today's Komodo dragon. The normal lizard legs and feet were transformed into wide, flat flippers. Sharp claws and toes for walking changed into spreading webbed feet. Tail and torso became extra sinuous and flexible for underwater swimming.
Plioplatecarpus was a compact mosasaur with a body plan that let it swim in fast bursts. Sharp teeth that curved inward could trap fish, turtle and slippery squid.

---new item--

AMMONITES
The Real Winners of the Darwin
Evolutionary High Score
When it comes to evolution, what matters is how many new species you produce, how fast you produce them, how widespread they become, and how long you can keep it up.
Ammonites made high marks in all categories. From the Devonian Period to the end of the Cretaceous, ammonites generated tens of thousands of species that invaded nearly every salt-water habitat in the world.
Ammonites as Geological Time-Keepers
Ammonite species came so fast and furiously that the average species only lasted a million years or less.
This quick turnover means that ammonites are near-perfect paleo-clocks.
Squiggle-Sutures
Ammonites are close kin of cuttlefish, squid and octopus and distant kin of the Nautilus. Like nautiloids, ammonites had hard shells that usually curled up in a fight spiral. As they grew, ammonites and nautiloids sealed off old parts of the shell with internal walls called septa.
Where nautiloids made simple partitions, ammonites inner shell walls were bent and folded. In advanced ammonites, each species had its own way of squiggling, giving us a quick method of identification.
But these squiggles served a greater purpose. The ammonite's body, head and tentacles were connected to the inner shell wall by muscles, which could be strained when it grabbed prey or wrestled with another ammonite.
A folded inner shell wall gave the muscles more surface area, allowing them to attach much more firmly.
Boom and Bust and Boom and Bust
Ammonites demonstrate a rhythm of success and failure over 300 million years-exploding in diverse new species, and then, tens of millions of years later, going totally bust.
Most species would die out, and the few surviving species would proliferate again and then go bust once more.
The final boom happened as T. rex and Triceratops ruled the land. Just as the last big dinosaurs died out, the ammonite hordes died, too. This time there were
no survivors.

---new item--

END CRETACEOUS -DEATH OF THE DINOSAURS
END CRETACEOUS | 65 MILION YEARS AGO
Sixty-five million years ago, the ecosystem collapsed, on land and in the sea. In the oceans, all the ammonites died, although the less common nautiloids survived.
Reefs were devastated. Plankton suffered near complete extinction. All the sea-lizards perished, as did the remaining plesiosaurs. Sea turtles, at least, survived.
On land, all the big dinosaurs died out. But the bird branch of the dinosaurian family tree continued to evolve and, in the Post-Cretaceous world, expand.
What caused this catastrophe? Many scientists are convinced that a massive meteorite smashed into the globe, sending up a cloud of debris that darkened the skies and chilled the Earth's surface so thoroughly that forests and woodlands were wiped out, depriving herbivorous dinosaurs of food and, in turn, depriving the carnivores of prey. Plus, acid rain may have fallen, deluging habitals in land and sea.
A meleorite does seem to have struck at or near the time of the great extinction, but would global cooling and
THE LATE CRETACEOUS WORLD
acid rain produce the pattern of death we see in the fossil record? The survivors help us test the extinction theories, In freshwater lakes and rivers, crocodiles, alligators, turtles, frogs and salamanders survived. A profound chilling, along with acid rain, would have killed many of these cold-blooded reptiles and amphibians.
On dry land, many lizards, snakes and mammals also survived and continued to evolve, even though small animals are unable to withstand cooling as well as giant species can.
What would kill big dinosaurs but leave crocodiles, turtles, small amphibians and mammals? An old theory says that extinctions are often caused by the sudden invasion of foreign species, which become pests in their new lands and introduce all sorts of new diseases. Big dinosaurs could certainly travel farther and faster than aquatic crocodilians, amphibians or small Cretaceous mammals.
Perhaps the big dinosaurs were victims of their own big-ness. What do you think?

---new item--

EOCENE

---new item--

LEAPING LEMURS!
Notharctus
Primates are a warmth-loving Order. Monkeys and apes are not native to North America today, but it was different in the Green River habitats. Primitive primates
-lemurs and tarsioid - climbed the tropical trees, eating fruit and chasing bugs.
Notharctus tenebrosus was a long-legged leaper almost identical in body plan to some of the lemurs in modern day Madagascar. Special joints at elbow and knee made it easy for Notharctus to cling to thick tree trunks. The prodigious power of the hind legs propelled Notharctus 30 feet or more from tree to tree.

---new item--

MENACE OF THE GREEN RIVER LAKES
Atractosteus & Alligator Gars
This Atractosteus is about 49 million years old. That's about halfway through the long history of garfish, which first evolved around 90 million years ago during the Cretaceous period.
The wide muzzle and strong fangs mark this fish as one of the largest and most dangerous of the garfish tribe — the alligator gars.
The armor-plated garfish is a classic living fossil -a creature alive today that has changed little from the time of the tyrannosaurs, 90 million years ago.
The alligator gar has diamond-shaped, armor-plated scales-each one made from a double layer of bone.
The outer layer is super-dense and so hard that even big bull alligators have a hard time biting through it.
The inner layer is spongier and attached to a sheet of connective tissue that works like a shock absorber. All the scales are knit together with tongue in-groove joints, allowing the fish to twist and flex.
Gars seem to be bulletproof from extinction, too. Mass die-offs struck dinosaurs 65 million years ago and then struck giant mammals several times. But each catastrophe left the gars unscathed.
Afractosteus was the apex predator in the sluggish fivers
of the Green River time, ambushing other fish, baby gators, snakes and the occasional 'possum.
This specimen shows the tough, double-layered armored scales at we also see in modern alligator gars. These scales were knit so tightly together that the fish had little to fear from a crocodile jaws. In fact, the only threats to a full-grown Atractosteus came from the largest crocodiles and from the tiger-like mammals that stalked the banks, the oxyenids.
Gar-Type Scales Are Ancient
In the Devonian, many fish tribes, both fresh-water and salt-water, had thick garlike scales. In the long run, fish evolution discriminated against thick armor, favoring thinner and lighter scales. By Green River times natural selection had eliminated most of the bulletproof fishes, except for the gars.
Why did gars retain the old-fashioned armor? We don't know for sure. Today's gars are lurkers, hiding in the shadows until prey swims near. The thick, heavy armor works ne for such tactics. However, for most fish, thinner scales and greater flexibility provide faster speeds and greater endurance.
Another ancient feature gars kept was air-breathing.
Gars have a primitive type of lung that lets them breathe air when the water becomes foul.

---new item--

THE DAWN HORSE, GRANDFATHER OF EQUIDS
Hyracotherium
Hyracotheres are the founding fathers of the horse family.
Examine the Hyracotherium: You won't find the signature features of modern horses. Modern equids have one toe on each foot; Hyracotheres have four up front, three in the back. Modern horses have long faces, with six molar-like teeth in each jaw. Hyracotheres had short faces with only three molars. Horses today have long, rather straight legs. Hyracotheres had highly flexed joints.
How Do We Know that Hyracotheres
Were Horses?
Because we have a wonderful series of fossils that show how toes, leg joints, molars and body size changed in small steps, from 55 million years ago through to today's fully modern horse species.
Odd Toes
Hyracotheres have three toes in the rear foot, the biggest being the center toe. The odd number and the emphasis on the center toe is a pedal blueprint an entire Order
—the Perissodactyla -that include.
orses, rhinos,
tapirs and many extinct groups.
Even Toes
Many small ungulates in Green River times had four toes, the strongest being the middle two. These creatures belong to the Order Artiodactyla, the dominant hoofed animals today. Antelope, cows, bison, camels, deer, giraffes, hippos, pigs and many other families are all artiodactyls.
Odds or Evens?
In the Eocene, odd-toed mammals made up nearly all the big-hoofed stock. Over the next 40 million years, however, the even-toed clan took over as commonest-hoofed herbivores.
How Did the Even-toes Win?
Best theory: Many even-toed mammals have more advanced stomachs, divided into multiple compartments that allow them soak and soften vegetation and detoxify the poisons that many plants embed in leaves and brar

---new item--

LIVING FOSSIL IN A HALF SHELL
Super Soft-Shelled Turtle
In warm rivers today, side by side with alligator gars, lives a second living fossil: a giant soft-shell turtle of the Trionychid family. The basic soft-shell design was locked in a hundred million years ago, during the dinosaur era.
Our trionychid comes from the Green River beds and is 49 million years old.
In soft-shell history, armor has been sacrificed for velocity.
The bone plates along the edge of the shell, normally thick and heavy, are gone entirely. The bottom shell, too, is reduced to a fraction of the standard turtle etern. The
Result: a lighter skeleton and the fastest swimming stroke in lakes and rivers.

---new item--

HISTORY'S BIGGEST SABER-TOOTH
Uintatherium
Saber-toothed mammals evolved many times from non-saber-toothed ancestors. The core of the saber-adaptation is an enormously enlarged upper fang shaped like a sword or dagger-flat on the sides and sharp-edged in the front and back.
Like many saber-toothed animals, Uintatherium evolved a special chin-guard that protects the fangs when its mouth is closed
To allow the animal to stab and slice with its sabers, the jaw joint lets the mouth open exceptionally wide. And, to increase the deadliness of the bite, the neck muscles are arranged to pull the head down, driving the fang further into the target.
The most famous saber-tooth is the Ice Age cat, Smilodon (you will see some up ahead). Most saber-toothed cats were of modest size, no bigger than a lion or tiger. The most gigantic of all saber-toothed animals were the uintatheres, common in mid-Eocene days. Skulls reached a yard in length. Bodies were elephant-heavy
-8 tons or more.
The uintathere could hone its giant upper fang by sliding it over a small lower tooth - an action that kept the fang edge sharp.
No mammal in the Eocene was nearly as dangerous.
But despite its fearsome fangs, Uintatherium was a plant-eater!
That is correct. The world's greatest saber-toothed animals had molars fit for chopping leaves.

---new item--

TERROR BIRD?
No! Terror Vegetarian!
Diatryma
The Eocene's giant flightless bird, Diatryma, is a sheep in wolf's clothing.
Old textbooks will tell you that this "terror bird" grew to grizzly bear size and was the most feared predator of its time. It ran down dawn horses and swallowed them in two bites; it chased our primate ancestors up trees; it dominated mammalian predators of the time
— a virtual feathered T. rex!
But Diairyma's reputation was all hype and misunderstanding. The "terror bird" rap comes from the beak. Both top and bottom are huge and deep. But living predatory birds like eagles and hawks don't have beaks like Diatryma's. They have a big hook at the end of the snout for spearing live prey and ripping it apart.
Diatryma's beak is hook-less. Eagles and hawks have thin lower jaws, because the hook does all the work.
Diatryma has an incredibly thick, strong lower beak.
Eagles and hawks have curved claws on their feet for skewering living victims. Diatryma has weak, blunt claws on its feet.
So what was Diatryma's prey? Nuts, berries and thick branches filled with sap. Diatryma had special cutting ridges on its beak and thickened zones for crushing vegetables. Basically, Diatryma was more like a giant goose than an eagle.
There were giant killer ground-birds in the Age of Mammals— in South America. These hunters had the beak hook and curved claws one would expect. Most species remained in South America. One did invade Florida, but not until the Great Ice Age.

---new item--

SPEEDY KILLER WARTHOGS
Our White River deposits, covering much of the High Plains and Rocky Mountains, tell scary stories of monster meat-eaters who ruled the middle Age of Mammals.
There were bear-dogs who could climb trees and dig burrows, saber cats, and hyaenodonts who had super-slicing molars fit to cut open a horse in three strokes.
Then there were the scariest predators of all: the fast-stepping, croc-snouted Killer Warthogs, also known as Archaeotheres.
The stall was monstrously large - as long as theorso.
The narrow crocodiloid snout carried thick, curved fangs. The jaw joint was like a hippo's - the mouth could open very wide, and then the jaws would snap shut, cracking the bones of unfortunate victims. Killer Warthogs did not slice their prey because they had no cutting teeth. Instead, they would whack at the carcass with their blunt premolars and molars, smashing the body into a White River haggis.
The Killer Warthog's speed made it even more frightening. The legs were very long. There were only two compact hooves on each foot, a design for high velocity chases over hard terrain. Few herbivores could outrun an Archaeotherium.
Archaeotheriums were violent among themselves too - at least the males. While modern warthogs have warts of soft skin and fat, prehistoric warts were bony, biggest in males, and made for frightening each other and impressing females. Scars on Archaeotheriums' muzzles testify to serious jaw wrestling.
These splendidly repugnant carnivores were not closely related to true pigs or warthogs. Archaeotheriums were their own separate clan - distant, distant kin of hippos
and (surprise) whales.
Our skeleton is "Miss Piggy," a modest-sized species.
Far bigger species reached polar bear weights, up to 1,500 pounds.

---new item--

WHITE RIVER RIVERBANK
The "killer warthog," Archaeotherium, is the largest predator in this dry Oligocene environment. Here it is chasing the three-toed horse, Mesohippus.
The oreodont Miniochoerus has chosen a tortoise burrow for her home, where she guards her young from the false-saber-toothed cat Dinictis.
A large creodont known as Hyaenodon looks on from the left. The bear-dog, Daphoenus, crouches in the limbs of the tree above.
Painting by Julius Csotonyi.

---new item--

THE BADLANDS
What rock layer in North America gives us more perfect skeletons than any other? The White River Group!
Beginning around 35 million years ago in the Late Eocene, streams flowng down from the Rocky Mountains brought sand and silt eastward onto the flatlands. Meanwhile, the river sediment was mixed with millions of tons of volcanic ash blown out by volcanoes in the far West.
The climate was warmer than today but cooler than in Green River times. In the rainy season, the mushy mix of ash and mud did a super job of burying skeletons that lay on the surface or hid in burrows.
For 10 million years, on through the Oligocene, the layers were built up. Eventually, the entire White River Group covered much of what are now six states. The climate got drier and drier, and the volcanic ash made the soil so alkaline that only the hardiest grasses and sagebrush could grow.
Fast-forward to modern times. Streams had eroded many valleys, exposing White River layers. Summers were now exceptionally hot and dry, while winters were very cold.
The first Europeans to explore the White River region were French fur-trappers in the 1700s. They feared the blistering heat and the undrinkable water, full of eroded volcanic ash. They called the dreist of the White River valleys the Mauvaise Terre-The Badlands.
But geological explorers going into the Big Badlands of the Dakotas before the Civil War were delighted with the bountiful fossils. Beautiful bones came from creatures that looked like tiny horses and even tinier camels. Others were shaped like shortlegged jaguars with enormous killing teeth. There were tiny fox-ike species and enormous rhinos with hippo-style fighting teeth.

---new item--

THE WHITE RIVER JAVELINA
Perchoerus
Winner of the Grand Prize for Living Fossil
In the sun-scorched Texas scrubland today, there are living relics from the White River -bristly-skinned omnivores who are nearly unchanged from 35 million years ago.
They are javelinas, also known as peccaries. They are not "pigs" — as evidenced by the fangs and feet.
Self-sharpening Fangs
Pigs have upper fangs that grow out sideways. Javelinas have tall fangs that are set vertically. The uppers and lowers grind against each other, keeping the edges sharp. Texas javelinas are only 30 pounds or so, but if a group is threatened, the snapping fangs of these living fossils can slice nasty wounds in the attackers.
Dainty Feet
Pig feet have four toes that spread out, so they can get traction in mud and soft sand. Javelinas are much daintier in their footwear: They have only two toes with small hooves. Javelinas can run faster and turn more quickly on hard ground.
The earliest White River javelina, Perchoerus, already had evolved the standard javelina fangs and feet. A time-traveling Perchoerus could be dropped into north Texas today and feel right at home.
One-of-a-kind Skeleton
Perchoerus is rare; a few fragmented skulls have been dug. There is only one good skeleton-this onel

---new item--

DAGGER-TOOTHED CAT
Dinictis
We tend to think that saber-toothed cats are weird and unusual. We're mistaken. White River habitats abounded with cats, and nearly all were saber-tooths of one sort or another. "Normal" cats with small fangs were rare or absent. Back then, not being a saber-tooth was weird
Dagger Tooth
The essence of being a saber-tooth is having a greatly enlarged, sharp-edged upper fang and a mouth that opens exceptionally wide, so the fang can stab and slice.
Dinictis had a thin, extra-sharp upper fang that would stab like a dagger. The neck action assisted the stab: neck muscles pulled the whole head and neck down, driving the dagger-fang into the target.
The dagger-toothed Dinictis was low-slung by modern cat standards, with legs sharply bent at elbow and knee. The paws, however, had the classic retractable cat claws so useful for climbing trees and snagging prey.

---new item--

LONG-SABER CAT
Hoplophoneus
Long-saber cats had fangs that were so long that they needed protection when the mouth was closed to prevent accidental breakage when the cat was running and jumping-
Look at the Hoplophoneus chin bone. There's a flange that works as a bone scabbard— a support for the tooth when the mouth was closed. Remember-we saw that scabbard in the plant-eating saber-tooth Uintatherium.
Hoplophoneus was extremely short-legged and bent at the joints. Speed was slow, but muscle leverage was high-features that improved tree-climbing and maneuvering in burrows.
Hoplophoneus skeletons have
been excavated from underground lairs.

---new item--

THE MINIATURE OREODONT
Miniochoerus
Miniochoerus was not much heavier than a miniature poodle, but it still had all the basic adaptive equipment of all oreodonts: digging paws, a monkey-like head and fighting chisel-fangs.
Mother in Her Burrow with Two Unborn Babies

---new item--

THE OREODONTS
Furry American Success Story
The most common White River vegetarians were the oreodonts. They're extinct now, but for millions of years this family of leaf-eaters was more numerous than all others across North America. There's no mammal family today that compares. The body was a cross between a dog and a small deer. The paws were four-toed and built something like a coyote's, with sharp claws good for excavating burrows.
Petrified evidence proves that oreodonts sought refuge in underground bunkers. Perfect skeletons are often dug from fossil burrows, and sometimes mother oreodonts are buried side by side with their pups.
The oreodont diet consisted of fruit, leaves, nuts and tubers.
The head was short snouted and boxy-reminiscent of a leaf-eating monkey's. And the chewing teeth were wide, sharp-cusped and excellent for chopping greenery.
Oreodonts were not timid Bambi's; they could fight. The fangs up front were self-sharpening, with the upper teeth honed to a sharp edge by the lower teeth.

---new item--

THE ZUHL COLLECTION
These sections of fossilized tree trunks are from trees that lived millions of years ago. When these trees died, rather than rotting away, they were petrified.
In order for a tree trunk to petrify instead of rotting, the wood must be rapidly buried to exclude oxygen. Without oxygen, the chemical reactions that cause the wood to decay cannot take place.
The volcanic sediments covering the trees are rich in soluble silica, a combination of atoms of the elements silicon and oxygen. The Silica dissolved in the water and the buried wood soaked up the silica-rich solution like a sponge. The dissolved silica fills the spaces in the lacey network of cells that make up the wood. Over time the water evaporates and leaves behind the silica, which solidifies.
Within spaces such as a crack or a rotten spot in the wood, the silica may form large quartz crystals with visible natural facets. In most of the wood, the rapidly solidifying silica forms milky opal, or layer upon layer of colorful agate. The different appearances of these forms of silica result from the way the atoms are arranged as the silica hardens The colorful stone record preserves the tree's structure and reveals details about the environment of millions of years ago, as well as the distinct history of each particular tree.

---new item--

MONSTER SCALLOPS OF THE MIOCENE
Gigantopecien
This group of Gigantopecten lived in the shallow sea that covered part of France 3 million years ago. The immense size and thickness of the shells indicate that these bivalve mollusks lived during a period of optimal habitat and resources.
Groupings were important to the animals reproductive strategy. As broadcast spawners, individual scallops release eggs and sperm into the water simultaneously.
Modern scallops are hermaphroditic, having both sets of reproductive organs. Individuals will change sex many times during their lives.
Like modern scallops, ancient scallops may have been vulnerable to powerful storms that swept across their shallow habitats. Surging waves would have decimated populations, spreading individuals out too thinly to reproduce or, as with this fossil assemblage, burying them alive.
The first scallops evolved during the Triassic Period, and today, members of the Pectinidae family look much the same as they did 200 million years ago.

---new item--

DARWIN'S WAR-HORSE
Hipparion
In the entire history of the Mammalia, two furry invaders stand out: the horse, Hipparion, and hominids. Both are intertwined in Darwinian history.
Most of the important events in horse history happened in North America. After the Dawn Horse first appeared 50 million years ago, American horse species invaded Asia and Europe repeatedly. The greatest invasion of all started about 11 million years ago, when new and advanced species of Hipparion spread out of the American West. Hipparion was unstoppable. It crossed the Bering Land Bridge and moved into the woodlands and prairies of Asia, Europe, India and Africa.
Hipparion swept over the Old World like an equine Mongol horde. The earliest human-like creatures, the australopiths, were surrounded by Hipparion species 7 million years ago in tropical Africa.
What gave Hipparion its momentum? Its feet were 90 percent modern. Most of the thrust came from the enlarged central hoof. Side toes still existed, but they were small and irregular. Jaws and teeth, too, were advanced. The six molars were tall and ever-growing.
For most of its life, Hipparion had molars that grew up as fast as they wore down.
This feet/molar combination opened up new, drier habitats, where leaves and branches were tougher and gritty dust covered the greenery. And the entire world was going that way. Summers were less moist. Tropical forests gave way to dry woodlands. Grasses took over ever greater areas of meadows. Hipparion was born to
thrive in these new environments.

---new item--

DAINTY DANCERS, HYENAS AT THEIR MOST GRACEFUL!
Ictitherium
In the days of the Hipparion fauna, hyenas came in a dozen sizes and shapes. The littlest ones were ictitheres, and their ultra-slender limbs, long wrists and ankles gave them the gracefulness of ballet dancers combined with the agility of greyhounds.
Audrey Hepburn Neck
Our Ictitherium neck would be the envy of most fashion models —magnificently long, thin, and elegant.
Ictitherium had another diagnostic hyena feature: premolar teeth that were stronger than usual and therefore useful for gnawing bones.
With their delicate proportions, ictitheres must have been quick hunters of small deer, antelope, rabbits, and rodents. Figs and nuts, termites, beetles and millipedes supplemented the diet.
Kept out of North America
Ictitheres were common and widespread across Africa and Eurasia, but the Bering Land Bridge was closed to them. No ictitheres reached the Americas. Why? It's a hyena mystery. Foxes and wolves made the trip, but not the dainty ictitheres.

---new item--

HIPPO - RHINO
Chilotherium
The zebra-like Hipparion was long-legged and fast. And in most places, its companion was the short-legged, tubby hippo-rhino.
From Texas to China to East Africa, hippo-rhinos like Chilotherium moved in great herds that left behind bone beds with tens of thousands of bones. They were true rhinos, close kin of today's Rhinoceros, the Asiatic one-horned rhino. Short legs go with water-loving habitats. Most modern-day rhinos love to wade and wallow in muddy pools or stream edges. Early rhinos had low molars fit for chomping soft fodder. Tall molars gave hippo-rhinos grass-eating potential, though gritty bushes were a favorite food, too.
Fang-Fighters
When we think "rhino," we tend to think "horns." But that's wrong: Most extinct rhinos had small horns or no
horns at all. Instead, their weapon was a lower incisor tooth which developed into a sharp-tipped spear that could rip open a saber-tooth cat or even a mastodon.
Modern Indian and Sumatran rhinos still carry the lower fang of their ancestors.
A hundred years ago, when European big-game hunters rode in howdahs on their elephants, Indian rhinos occasionally attacked and killed the elephants.
Chilotherium evolved just about the largest fighting fangs of any rhino ever. Bulls carried longer fangs than cows, suggesting that bull-on-bull violence was common.
Angry Chilotherium bulls probably attacked mastodons when those pachyderms got too close.

---new item--

"KING OF THE SHARKS"
Megalodon
Here is the largest jaw ever assembled of the stupendous
C. megalodon shark—a fish twice as long as the largest known great white shark. "Meg" teeth were whale-choppers. Each tooth carried a fine, saw-toothed edge and a thick central zone. Whale bones from deposits full of Meg teeth show deep cuts and gouges that match the
C. megalodon's dental anatomy.
Elephant tribes were on the menu, too. All members of the elephant clan are expert swimmers, and mastodons and mammoths spread across the Pacific. Mastodons dog-paddling in the surf were occasional victims of Meg attacks, as proven by bite marks on mastodon ribs and vertebrae.
C. megalodon Jaw.
Gift of Charles T. Jeremiah and Family

---new item--

MASTODON WITH A BUILT-IN SHOVEL
Platybelodon
About 17 million years ago came the strangest tusks of all. "Normal" Mastodon tusks, like Gomphotherium's, were long and straight with pointed tips. Platybelodon, the shovel-tusked mastodon, carried lower tusks that were unbelievably wide. Together the right and left tusks made a sort of shovel.
What did shovel-tuskers do with their shovel? Perhaps they scooped up water plants. Maybe they cut through thick bushes. Or, maybe they carried their babies when they grew tired of walking behind their moms.
We don't know the answer yet. What do you think?

---new item--

MIOCENE MASTODON
Mammut Migrations
Mammoth is a label that refers to an extinct close relative of the elephant. Mastodon is a label that covers a dozen distinct tribes of giant mammals who were more distant kin of elephants.
The most famous mastodon,
genus Mammut, evolved during Hipparion times and grew to five tons or more.
Mammut evolved a coarse vegetable chopper type molar.
Each tooth had two thick cutting edges made from a pair of cusps. The Mammut molar made short work of slender tree trunks and thick branches. For attack and defense, upper tusks grew long and almost straight; the lower tusks were tiny and nearly useless.
Late Miocene Mammut scored a record for tusk length. among mastodons, growing more than 15 feet. That's too long to be effective as weapons, so we need another explanation. The bulls may have grown excessively long tusks to impress females and persuade them that their genes were desirable.
Mastodon Wanderlust
Elephants today are skilled swimmers and can cover many miles in salt water. Their oceanic prowess explains why mammoths and mastodons spread rapidly from continent to continent. Mammut and related Anancus mastodons first evolved in Africa and then spread quickly.
Mammut arrived in Texas and other southern states by 2
million years ago.
Anancus was a record mastodon traveler. It made it all the way to southern South America!
Not all elephant-kin were so successful. The "upside down mastodons," the deinotheres, had tusks that grew down from their lower jaws. Deinotheres did well in warm parts of the Old World, but they never could get across the cold Bering Land Bridge.

---new item--

PLIOCENE AND PLEISTOCENE

---new item--

CHINLESS SABER-TOOTHED CAT
Smilodon
Smilodon is by far the most famous saber-tooth, thanks to thousands of specimens from the La Brea Tar Pits in California. It even stars in the popular Ice Age movies as the cunning cat, Diego.
However, among all the saber-tooths, Smilodon is the odd-man out. It is chinless. It has no deep flange to protect the saber fang when the jaw is closed. What good was a chin-less lower jaw? Smilodon could strike with its mouth closed by pulling down with the neck muscles.
But Smilodons did break their sabers. Tar Pit specimens sometimes have one or even both fangs broken, with the fractured ends worn down. How could saber-toothed cats survive with broken sabers?
The best theory is that mated pairs helped each other. If one injured a fang, the other took over the prey-killing duties. Or, like lions today, groups of sisters may have hunted together.

---new item--

GIANT SHORT-FACED BEAR
Arctodus
If you were a full-grown saber-toothed Smilodon, what animal should you think twice about before attacking?
The giant short-faced bear!
One of the largest bears to ever inhabit North America, Arctodus reached heights of 15 feet and weights of a ton and a half-twice the size of the average male grizzly bear. But Arctodus was far leggier than grizzlies and polar bears and probably faster.
A short, wide muzzle and deep snout gave Arctodus a vice-like grip. What did it eat? Anything it could catch!
Large molars were capable of crunching young grass, roots, and berries. Killer fangs could dispatch a buffalo with one bite. Analysis of chemicals in some Arctodus fossils show a high concentration of nitrogen-15, an element that accumulates when an animal eats a diet rich in me
Other short-faced bear populations probably
trovu
more vegetarian diet.
North America sent bear invaders into South America.
The short-faced bear clan set up evolutionary centers in both continents. Arctotherium reached an all-time ursid record in Argentina, growing to two tons.

---new item--

GIRAFFES AND GIRAFFE SHORTIES
Shansitherium
In the 1800s, scientists dug many rich bone beds full of Hipparion-age fossils in Greece, Turkey, Iran, India and China. Mixed in with the horses and hippo-rhinos were giraffes in delightful variety.
There were tall species of Giraffa, close relatives of modern-day giraffes, but more common were short giraffes such as Samotherium (named for the Greek island of Samos) and Shansitherium (named for Shanxi Province in China). These had medium-long necks and legs, with sloping shoulders that gave the body a moose-like shape.
How Do We Tell a Giraffe from Other
Hoofed Animals?
All members of the giraffe family had a unique way of building horns: The horn core was dense bone, and it grew up and back from above the eye socket. Antelope and bison add an outer layer of protein called keratin
— the same substance that makes up our fingernails and toenails. Giraffes cover their horns with soft skin.
Skin-covered horns fit the fighting method of giraffes.
Bulls swing their heads down and sideways to land blunt blows against the neck or shoulder of rivals.
The Living Fossil-Okapia
Short giraffe fossils disappear around 3 million years ago, when the short giraffe species seemed to vanish completely.
Then in 1900, reports came from the Congo Basin that a strange animal had been sighted by explorers. The mystery beast seemed to have giraffe-like horns -blunt and covered in soft skin.
One year later, skulls reached London. They were dead ringers for the short giraffes so common at Hipparion dig sites. It was as if a live mastodon or saber-toothed cat had walked out of the forest.
The living fossil was christened Okapia, and probably survived by hiding in dense, humid forests while its relatives in drier habitats went extinct.
No giraffe species could handle the cold; none ever crossed the land bridge into North America.

---new item--

"SLOTHZILLA"
Eremotherium
Greatest of the Ground Sloths
Sloths today are strictly tree-climbers of modest size, hanging upside down, eating leaves, moving slowly, and coming down to the ground only to defecate.
A few thousand years ago, the sloth clan was rich in gigantic ground dwelling species as big as oxen or even elephants. The sloth families were one branch of a vast old South American complex that included armadillos and anteaters.
But as long as oceans separated South America from North America, the sloth empire could not expand.
When the Isthmus of Panama emerged from the sea about 5 million years ago, sloths moved north, occupying Texas and other southern states. One sloth family made it all the way to Alaska.
North America was a dangerous place to invade. Sloths were greeted by giant bears, lions, and three types of saber-toothed cats. How did they defend themselves?
Eremotheres hide had a layer of tightly packed bone nuggets that worked like the chain-mail of a medieval
knight. Active defense was performed by swipes of their forepaws. A 10-ton eremothere could fling a saber-toothed cat a dozen yards.
Eremotherium displays the advanced ground-sloth body design: thick, powerful hind-legs, stubby tail, and long arms. Few tubers and edible roots were safe from a determined eremothere. These multi-ton sloths could harvest leaves, fruit, and branches by reaching up and dragging tree limbs down.
Eremotheres walked on the outside of their hind-feet, curling their large claws inward. When they dug with their forelimbs, ground-sloths braced themselves with their tails and dug into the ground with their rear claws.
Despite their prodigious success, all ground sloths abruptly became extinct around 10,000 years ago.
Their extermination was part of the terminal Ice Age extinction —a die-off of nearly all the giant mammals across North and South America.

---new item--

THE NORTH AMERICAN, SOUTH AMERICAN EXCHANGE DURING THE PLEISTOCENE
North America
In the boreal forests of the north, Arctodus, the giant short-faced bear, faces off with Smilodon, the famous saber-toothed cat of the Pleistocene.
In the temperate forests, a camelid, Hemiauchenia, looks on as the giant ground sloth Eremotherium ambles across the landscape.
Painting by Julius Csotonyi.

---new item--

ANDEAN CONDOR
Vultur gryphus
The Andes Mountains arose in the Miocene, forming the 'backbone' of South America. This mountain chain begins in extreme northwest Venezuela, then runs west through Colombia and straight south along the
'continental spine' to Tierra del Fuego. As these high mountains plateaued and new habitats were created, species diversity likewise increased
One of the most magnificent of the Andean endemics is the Andean Condor, found throughout the Andes and its foothills. As the Latin name Vultur implies, these birds are essentially a huge vulture-having one of the longest wingspans of all birds, which can reach approximately 10 feet! Also as the Latin name implies, these mega-vultures eat carrion (decomposing flesh), fulfilling an extremely vital role as nature's solution to animals that die on our planet.
While fossils of Andean Condors have been found in parts of Brazil that are now tropical, their relatives the California Condor (Gymnogyps californianus) have fossilized remains in North America, as do other species of closely related condors that are now extinct. It is likely that the massive Pleistocene mammals on display below the condors, such as giant ground sloths (Eremotherium) and giant armadillos (Glyptodon), crossed the paths of these 'rulers of the sky' during the Great American Faunal Interchange.
Gift of Zoo Miami
HMNS VO 3572

---new item--

"MADE IN AMERICA" THE CAMEL FAMILY!
Paleolama
When we think of camels, we usually think of the Sahara Desert, Lawrence of Arabia, or vast Mongolian grasslands. But in fact, the camel family is Made In The USA-it is a strictly North American product.
The first camels show up in the fossil record around 35 million years ago in Nebraska and Wyoming. These camels were tiny and delicate and looked like a cross between a jackrabbit and a miniature gazelle. Their feet did not end in the wide, spreading toe-pads of modern camels. Instead, each toe had a sharp, compact hoof.
The diet of early camels focused on low-growing herbs and bushes, with the addition of arid-land weeds and grass later on.
Over the next 30 million years, camels evolved to include tiny, small, medium, large, and extra-large species-the tallest almost rivaling giraftes.
Fangs and Noxious Loogies-Camel Defenses
Camels co-evolved with saber-toothed cats, wolf-like hyenodonts and bears of all sorts, and camel self-defense developed along unusual lines. Instead of running away, like deer, camels fought back. They grew sharp fangs in their snouts, and they became expert marksmen with smelly spit. Saliva mixed with regurgitated stomach fluid could be hurled a dozen feet.
Today, domesticated mid-sized camels —the llama - make excellent guards for sheep. Lamas will charge a coyote, biting at its face and rump and unleashing salvos of noxious loogies.
Our Paleolama was one of the middleweight species common across North America during the last 12 million years.
In the Great Ice Age, camels got their chance to emigrate.
The big camels crossed Beringia on their cushiony-feet, ready for the squishy sands and bare gravels of deserts in Asia, Arabia, and Africa. Mid-sized camels, llamas and vicuñas, went the other way into South America, down to the dry plains of Argentina and the mountain meadows of Peru:

---new item--

"ARMADILL-O-ZILLA"
Glyptodon
Giant shelled herbivores, the glyptodonts, also invaded from South America, moving north across the Isthmus of Panama. Close cousins of true armadillos, the glyptodonts developed a stiff armored shell composed of many interlocking bone plates. Muscular front legs and wide claws let glyptodonts dig for tubers and roots.
Tall molars were excellent for grinding gritty plant parts.
When attacked, glyptodonts could dig straight down with fore and hind feet so only the top of the shell was exposed.
(Tank-driving soldiers call this the "hull-down position.")
The head could be tucked down and back and was protected by thick forehead armor. The rear end was a dangerous weapon —the e en tail was encased in
rings of bony armor and coulde
smashing blows.

---new item--

COOKIE-CUTTER SABER-TOOTHED CAT
Xenosmilus
All saber-toothed cats were extremely muscular, and Xenosmilus was exceptionally massive and strong. It could use its thick legs and neck to wrestle dangerous prey and throw it to the ground.
The nickname "cookie-cutter" comes from Xenosmilus' arrangement of teeth. The wide saber-fangs were super-sharp, and the nipping teeth (the incisors) were enlarged and sharp-edged, too. All the teeth had saw-edges. The entire set of teeth made a semi-circle, and when the cat bit hard, the teeth sliced out a large, semi-circular chunk of flesh.
Xenosmilus is mysterious and extremely rare. There are only two known skeletons, both dug from a cave in Florida. The cave was full of javelina bones —perhaps Xenosmilus's favorite prey? But javelin fossils occur all across North and South America. Maybe Xenosmilus preferred some sort of unusual habitat where fossilization didn't occur.
We don't know yet for sure.
In contrast, the chin-less saber-cat, Smilodon, left its bones all over North and South America in caves and tar pits, stream deposits and swamps. Xenosmilus teaches us a paleontological lesson: despite two centuries of exploration in Ice Age sediments, there must still be dozens of unknown species waiting to be discovered.

---new item--

THE NORTH AMERICAN, SOUTH AMERICAN EXCHANGE DURING THE PLEISTOCENE
South America
Titanus, the "terror bird," migrates from South America to North America.
In the warmer palmetto savannah of the south, the saber-toothed cat Xenosmilus attempts an attack on the highly armored Glyptodon, while a group of wild horses, Equus, graze in the background. The little cacomistle, Bassariscus, hangs from the branches of a tree.
Painting by Julius Csotonyi.

---new item--

GIANT ARMADILLO
Holmesina
True armadillos, with flexible shell-armor, also came into the southern states from South America. Our beloved local Texas armadillo, Dasypus novemcinctus, arrived during this armored invasion. It was accompanied by a relative with far more gravitas — Holmesina-who reached weights of a quarter ton.
One of the very best Holmesina skeletons is this one, collected from fossil beds right here in Houston. Its claws and feet are enlarged versions of the common Texas armadillo, and so are its jaws and teeth. That means the Texas giant armadillo probably ate prickly pear fruit, soft leaves, tubers of all sorts, and occasional bird nests and snakes.

---new item--

ATLATL OVERKILL?
The Great Ice Age Extinctions
Mammons, madodons, giant slohs, saber-toched cats ad many cher mega-fauna species died out about 10,000 years ago in North America. It was the last monumental exfinction of land life in the fossil record.
What happeneda
One popular theory is that skilled atlaists were so effective that they slaughtered all the giant herbivores.
The carnivores, deprived of food, then died of starvation.
There is circumstantial evidence for this theory: Humans entered the New World about 15,000 years ogo. Clovis-ayle otal points become common and widespread about 13,000 years ago. Most of the giant mammals disappeared between 11,000 and 10,000 years ago.
Think of 8 as o trial. Humon hunters had the opportunity
-they were here at the right time. They had motive-
mammoth nect was delicior for of least nutriious). They
had the merms-the allel, exipped with a Clovis point, could kil o gians
Case desed? Not quite, There is a problem with the ory. Very lew mommoth skeletons show cut marks rom humon batchering Mod mammoth, madiodon and on does veem to have died frain oher causes. If san did couse the extiuction, i must have happened so lus fict lonlization couldn't captute de evidence:
We may have orstedliented how elective done age
profles, toee thicos and a higpo apecies, in addtior
LAST GLACIAL MAXIMUM
On islands, the situation is different. Native fauna does seem especially vulnerable to human hunting. The giant Rightless birds of New Zealand, the moos, disappeared shonly after the arrival of humans around 1,000 AD, and the some fate awaited the elephant bird of Madagascar when our species invaded about 1,400 AD.
In Australia the circumstantial evidence again points lo humans as ogents of extinction, at legsi in port. The first allailwielding humans became common around 40,000 years ogo. Shorty afterwards, giant kangaroos and huge wombat-relatives go edinct.
Alernative Suspect: Climate Change
The climate worldwide suffered savage perturbations through the los Age, Glaciers advanced over the land and then retrected a dozen times. Winters got dry, then wet. forests spread north, then retreated south. The very last glocial melt back was lollowed by hot weather
Could these weather shits have killed the mommoths and their nsighbor Elephants today are hardy creatures, capable of decling with all sorts of habitole. They can migrote hundreds of miles to escupe local odverse conditions. An important consideration is thes them were dovem of big mommals, each species adopted to a different hobiat 1's hard to imagine a cimato shit that would kill ol the woolly mammoths and all
the Coluebion nounsohhs, ples thas desens ground sods
and the woolland ground dohs, and he swimplesung madadors cs well
The Great los Age discin condinue to pissekas debon and there o co consents about what punt lumans in he Maw World

---new item--

OUR FAMILY TREE
The imogo to your lah mpresents our lonly bee The story sons cround 55 milien yean ogp cl lose de the tr
trunk in the lower leh comer. Noice hon, as you tollo» the tie, here on branches with leghty, and branches when. Than wih leaves represent sting dart*
we approach us, seen i
the lover center di the mor
The tpecen os depad mide erord ed o ed t
to pons The beton potion showg taut retoins thar
the anton, reconsuction is bound on. Most ohen we con ey on o chul to lom the baris for the focial meconarucion
have very lide moleriol to go by, other than DNA, and that is relected in the representation of strands di DNA ombined with a hard to dinguith facial reconstrucion as we redly do not know what they locked

---new item--

GIANT BULL
Mammut americanum
Enormous mammoths and mastodons roamed North America in the Ice Age, and humans hunted both. The
"American Mastodon," Mammut americanum, was the last species of Mammut and kept the same simple chopping molars that had evolved in the Miocene 12 aiion years earlier.
Different dietary preferences keep mastodons and mammons opart in most places. Mammoths preferred grass and dry leaves in open plains and woodlands while Mastodons went for softer, wider branches in wetter forests and swamps. Many mastodon bones turned up in bogs being drained by American farmers in the 1700s.
Thomas Jefferson's Order to Lewis and Clark:
"Find a Live Mastodon!"
Colonial naturalists were fascinated with Mammut.
Thomas Jefferson had Mastodon bones on display in the
White House when he was president, along with ground sloth specimens and parts of mammoths.
Jefferson was sure that such a magnificent creature must have been alive, somewhere in the unknown American West. He instructed explorers Lewis and Clark to find a herd of live mastodons in the Rocky Mountain region.
Lewis and Clark didn't bag a mastodon, or a mammoth, or a ground sloth.
Ice Age fossils proved that Nature was unpredictable and prone to worldwide catastrophe. Our present-day ecosystem is missing most of the giant mammals that once ruled, and Jefferson never got his prize alive.
Cast of Mastodon Skeleton, "Priscilla."
Gift of Charles T. Jeremiah and Marla Moore

---new item--

MAMMOTH HUNTERS
The Clovis Elephant-Gun
Problem: Spears thrown by hand have limited range and rarely had the velocity necessary to penetrate the thick hide of mammoths. Hitting a mammoth at close range with a spear would have only made the mammoth mad. To kill mega-fauna, human hunters needed to double the velocity.
Solution: The atlatl. This spear-thrower doubles the effective length of the hunter's arm. The spear shaft is laid along a stiff, narrow board about as long as the distance from fingers to elbow. A spike at the free end of the atlatl holds the buttend of the spear.
The hunter hurls the atlatl forward with a quick flick of the wrist and elbow as the entire arm and shoulder goes forward.
If executed correctly, the spear comes out of the atlatl with stunning energy. The shaft is a two-stage missile:
The long main shaft receives the thrust from the atlatl.
The shorter fore-shaft carries the point and is made from harder, denser wood. It separates from the main shaft just after the target is struck.
Native hunters still use atlatls in parts of Australia to bring down kangaroos. Atlatls with heavy, harpoon-style fore-shafts are used to hunt whales and walrus in the North Pacific. When the Spanish Conquistadors invaded Mexico they were met by Aztec warriors with atlatis, which, properly thrown, dented steel armor.
For prehistoric hunters, the atlatl changed the rules.
Now humans were potential big-game killers. Mammoths, mastodons of all clans, rhinos, giant buffalo-none were safe.
When did our species acquire this weaponry?
Beautifully crafted atlatls made from antler or ivory come from French cave sites up to 18,000 years old.
Archaeologists have long suspected that this weapon dates back much farther. Unfortunately, most atlatis were made of wood, and since woody material rots quickly, there is little hope of finding many ancient atlatls.
Atlatl-Elbow & "Mungo Man"
How can we tell when was the first atlatls were used?
The best evidence comes from a case of "atlatl-elbow." The oldest human remains from Australia include Mungo Man, buried 40,000-50,000 years ago near Mungo Lake. No atlatl was found here, but there is still spectacular proof of atlatling. Mungo Man had a peculiar injury to his right elbow—a deterioration seen today in tennis players who have a powerful overhand serve.
It's exceedingly unlikely that Mungo Man played tennis.
However, there's another pastime that harms elbow joints in the same fashion: atlatling. Mungo seems to have atlatled nearly all his life.
When Mungo's people first entered Australia, they probably carried atlatls. Mungo's ancestors came from Southeast Asia, suggesting many people in Europe and Asia were likely atlatling earlier than 50,000 years ago!
When human hunters entered North America 15,000 years ago or so, they were probably armed with atlatls.
Stone weapon points known as Clovis points were almost certainly used on atlatis beginning about 13,000 years ago. Furthermore, we have conclusive evidence that Clovis people succeeded in killing mammoths:
Mammoth skeletons have been discovered with Clovis points embedded in their rib cages.

---new item--

OLDOWAN STONE TOOLS
Representing the early Stone Age and named after a site in Tanzania, Oldowan tools represent the earliest known man-made tools. These stone tools date back to 2.6 million years ago and continued to be used without any major modifications until 1.7 million years ago.
The Oldowan toolkit consisted of hammerstones —stone cores with flake scars along one or more edges and sharp stone flakes struck from the cores. The Oldowan stone tool tradition was eventually replaced by the Acheulean stone tool tradition.

---new item--

ACHEULEAN STONE TOOL TRADITION
Acheulean is the name given to a form of stone tool manufacturing associated with prehistoric humans during the Lower Paleolithic era. These tools date back to 1.5 million years ago and have been found across Africu, much of Asia and Europe, where they appeared around 400,000 years ago.
With the Acheulean tradition several technical innovations in tool making appear:
• The raw stone material is worked from both sides, resulting in a symmetrical shaped tool with a cutting edge.
• Tool shapes become more standardized, with considerably more production steps required than with earlier Oldowan tools.
• Tool forms differed according to usage. Handaxes tended to be massive, used as multi-purpose tools.
Scraping and cutting tools were smaller and more restricted in their use.
Associated with Homo erectus and Homo heidelbergensis, Acheulean was the dominant technology for the vast majority of human history. It was the first stone tool technology to leave Africa, and is famous for its oval and pear-shaped handaxes. Later Acheulean tools employed the Levallois technique that yielded flakes of preplanned shape and size, a process which greatly improved the efficiency and utility of flakes as tools.

---new item--

THE DEADLY CLIFF TRAP
Over the last million years, our human species, Homo sapiens, became ever more clever and deadly. A subspecies, Homo sapiens neanderthalensis, the famous Neanderthal man, succeeded in colonizing cold plains and steppes near the glaciers 200,000 years ago.
Neanderthals hunted mammoth and piled their bones in great heaps — maybe even making cabins out of legs and shoulder blades.
Not only did Homo sapiens hunters invent the razor-edged spear point, they also enlisted the powerful weapon of gravity with landscape-tactics.
Even biggest, most aggressive and most fearsome prey can be defeated by topography. Rhinos, elephants and buffalo can be crippled when they are lured off the edge of a 10 foot liff. In the 1600s, Native American hunters were using funnel traps to kill entire herds of bison. The beasts would be driven through a funnel-shaped corral constructed from piles of rocks and thick branches woven into barricades. Hunters waving blankets urged the hairy beasts to stampede from the wide entrance into the narrow neck of the funnel until the herd plunged over a cliff.
Thousand of years earlier, Ice Age hunters in Europe used cliff-traps to harvest the biggest and most dangerous game —woolly rhinos and mammoths. How did the hunters drive the monsters to their death? They probably used fire to manipulate the panicked pachyderms.
Modern day farmers in India repel elephants with torches, shouts and banging on metal pots. Ancient hunters probably used lines of fire to panic mammoths and mastodons into cliff-fall ambushes.
This theory has proof: Heaps of mammoth and rhino bones, cut by stone tools, have been excavated at the bottom of cliffs in England and Germany.
Look up! We have a hunting party of Clovis people driving a giant Columbian mammoth over a precipice.

---new item--

MAMMOTH OF THE SOUTH
Mammuthus columbi
Most folks assume that there was just one kind of mammoth
— the woolly mammoth, Mammuthus primigenius.
In fact, there were a dozen mammoth species, all with close family ties to today's Indian elephant. The woolly mammoth favored extra-frigid habitats near glaciers and grew thick under-fur to cope with the wind-blasted climate.
Mammuthus columbi, the Columbian mammoths, were also hairy on the outside, but they had thinner under-fur suited for the climate farther south, away from the glaciers. On average, Columbian mammoths grew taller than the woollies and had a lankier build.

---new item--

"HUMAN ANCESTOR FROM THE SAHEL REGION OF CHAD"
Sahelanthropus tchadensis
7-6 MILLION YEARS AGO
In 2001, a French team of paleoanthropologists discovered a nearly complete cranium, an associated jaw fragment, femur and several teeth in the deserts of Chad in West-Central Africa. With a brain size similar to that of contemporary chimps, Sahelanthropus place on the human family tree is not universally accepted.
However, the location of the foramen magnum, the opening in the base of the skull allowing the spinal cord to connect to the brain, does suggest a habitual upright walking posture.

---new item--

"SOUTHERN APE FROM THE AFAR REGION OF ETHIOPIA"
Australopithecus afarensis
3.9 - 3 MILION YEARS AGO
Australopithecus afarensis is one of the longest-lived and best-known species of early human. Paleoanthropologists have uncovered remains from more than 300 individuals in eastern Africa (Ethiopia, Kenya and Tanzania), dating from between 3.9 and 3 million years ago. This species survived for more than 900,000 years - more than four fimes as long as our own species has been around.
Lucy-known in her homeland of Ethiopia as
"Dinkenesh" - is the best-known representative of Australopithecus afarensis. Other famous fossils of this species include "Selam," a 3-year-old girl, and the "First Family," a group of 17 individuals thought to have been killed in an attack by large predators, such as saber-tooth cats.

---new item--

"HANDY HUMAN"
Homo habilis
2.3 - 1.4 MILION YEARS AGO
The earliest known member of the species Homo, Homo habilis was bipedal, a maker of crude stone tools, and endowed with a brain about half the size of that of a modern human. Their remains have been found in Kenya, Tanzania and Ethiopia. Scientists are still debating whether some of the fossils originally identified as Homo habilis should be assigned to another species, Homo rudolfensis.

---new item--

"HUMAN FROM THE NEANDER VALLEY"
Homo neanderthalensis
500,000 - 28,000 YEARS AGO
Neanderthals are our closest extinct human relative.
Their range extended from Western Europe into Siberia and into present day Israel. No Neanderthal remains have been found in Africa. The earliest Neanderthals appeared around 500,000 years ago; the last survivors vanished around 28,000 years ago.
The first specimen recognized as an early human was found in 1856 and named Homo neanderthalensis after the Neander Valley in Germany where it was found.
Adapted to a very cold environment, Neanderthals had an impressive physique. They made and used a diverse set of sophisticated tools, controlled fire, lived in shelters, made and wore clothing, ate plant foods, and occasionally made symbolic or ornamental objects.
Neanderthals deliberately buried their dead and occasionally even marked their graves with flower offerings. Recent comparisons between Neanderthal and modern human DNA established that there is up to 4% shared genetic material between Neanderthal and people of Europeans descent.

---new item--

WALKING UPRIGHT
Walking upright is one of the traits that define humans.
An answer to when and where this trait evolved comes from the well-preserved remains of Ardipithecus ramidus.
Nicknamed "Ardi," this early hominid lived in East Africa around 4.4 million years ago. Of interest to us here are the very well-preserved remains of Ardi's foot. Her four little toes were adapted for walking upright on the ground. However, what literally stands out is the big toe.
It was still opposable, and would have permitted Ardi to move through trees more easily than a later upright species, Australopithecus afarensis ("Lucy").

---new item--

BASIC CHEMISTRY: IT'S ELEMENTARY!
Chevron and Westlake Corporation
THE PERIODIC TABLE OF STUFF

---new item--

ATOMIC ANATOMY
The atom Is a union of three kinds of particles: protons, neutrons, and electrons. Except for hydrogen -which has no neutrons-protons and neutrons form the nucleus of every atom, while electrons orbit the nucleus in a series of successive energy levels called shells. In atomic models, these shells are often represented by concentric circles, but in reality, they are cloudlike zones in which an electron can exist anywhere at any moment. When an Imbalance of protons and electrons produces an unstable electric charge, atoms stabilize themselves by stealing or sharing electrons in their outer shells. This exchange forms chemical bonds-the basis for all chemical interactivity.

---new item--

ALFRED C. GLASSELL, JR. HALL
BLACK MARLIN
Istiompax indica
BLUE MARLIN
Makaira nigricans
Tropical and temperate oceans worldwide allt of Altred C. Clangell, Jr.
TOM SRITTAM
WAHOO
Acanthocybium solandrit
GREAE
HAMMERHEAD SHARK
Sphyrna mokarran
1- Tropled anes wotdwte oal
DUSKY DOLPHIN
Lagenorhynchus obscurus
Tropical and sub-tropical coastal zones
In Southern Hem
COMMON
THRESHER SHARK
Alopias vulpinus
Tropical and temperate oceans worldwide
ROOSTERFISH
Nematistlus pectoralis
Eastorn tropleal Pacifie ocean
YELLOWFIN TUNA
Thunnus albacares
Tropical and tomperate oceans worldwid
COMMON
DOLPHINFISH
Coryphaena hippurus
Tropical and sub
AFRICAN POMPANO
Alectis ciliaris
Tropical and sub-tropical ocoans wordwide
SHARKSUCKER
REMORA
Echinis naucrates
Gift of Troy Denson

---new item--

ALFRED C. GLASSELL, JR. HALL
MANTA RAY
Manta birsotris
Tropical and temperate oceans worldwide
OCEAN SUNFISH
Mola mola
Tropical and temperate oceans worldwide

---new item--

ALBINO AND NORMAL MOLLUSKS
The total lack of pigmentation in a living animal can be the result of genetic variability or mutation.
Without the normal coloration of the living animal, and in this case including its shell, albino animals seldom escape the eyes of predators to reach adulthood.
These particular mollusks managed to reach maturity and pass along their genetically inherited traits to future generations. Each pair exhibits the normal coloration along with the extremely rare albino of each species.

---new item--

FRESHWATER BIVALVES
Most bivalves living in freshwater habitats exhibit little variation. Streams, rivers, ponds and lakes provide these filter-feeding mollusks with the nutrients necessary for survival. However, many species are now extinct or under extreme pressure to survive due to pollution and habitat loss. Around the world these mollusks are under great pressure to coexist with humans' increasing need for land and freshwater. As a result, some species of clams are also threatened with extinction because the juvenile must spend part of its early lifecycle in the gills of certain species of freshwater fishes.
Protection of habitats is necessary and in many instances is proving effective. In Texas the Tampico pearlymussel, (Cyrtomaids tampicoensis) found in the Concho River, can produce a freshwater pearl that rivals and exceeds the beauty and value of rare South Sea pearls. Some of these pearls can be found in the exhibit case on pearls.
FRESHWATER GASTROPODS
Though far less numerous and well known, freshwater gastropod mollusks are found around the world in streams, rivers, ponds, lakes and swamps. Their shapes are variable as in their marine cousins, but they lack their bright colors in order to remain hidden from predators.
Many can carry diseases that are harmful or even deadly to humans such as the Planorbidae snails, which can be carriers of schistosomiasis.
So, unlike marine gastropods, very few are consumed by humans.
Participate in local area beach clean-up events. It's a cool and fun activity for children and friends that will make a direct impact on the oceans.
To learn more, look for the Pearls of Wisdom throughout the hall.

---new item--

GROWTH OF A SPECIES FAMILY: VOLUTIDAE
Cymbiola musica, or Music Volutes, are so called because their patterns often include what appear to be musical scores of lines and notes. This Caribbean species is one of the Volutidae that have an operculum, or trap door, as protection from predators.
Cymbiola amphora comes from Australian waters and is another of the bailer shells used as tools and receptacles for other things used by man.
1 Voluta musica
enezuela, MAL 588/
Ista de Margarita, Venezuela, MAL 64243
2 Melo amphora
land, Western Australta, Australa, ML.70271
Western Australia, Australia, MAL. 6422
GROWTH OF A SPECIES FAMILY: MURICIDAE
Muricidae are among the mollusks which lay eggs that emerge as young already prepared for life.
These two species live in different areas of the Pacific Ocean.
Homolocantha pele only live in the waters of the Hawaiian islands.
Their irregular outline helps them be less visible to predators.
Chicoreus ramosus lives in central Pacific habitats primarily in the Philippine Islands. Colors can be quite variable, but the form seldom changes. This species of Murex shells grow to be the largest of the family Muricidae.
Avoid aerosol sunscreens and use only those that also protect fragile beach environments and coral reefs.
To learn more, look for the Pearls of Wisdom throughout the hall.

---new item--

FAMILY: SPONDYLIDAE
As bivalves, the Spondylus family is one of the most popular because of their flamboyant spines and many colors.
These mollusks live their whole lives attached to other hard surfaces, such as rocks, sunken ships, corals and even the pilings of oil rigs. The spines provide protection from predators, but they also allow other organisms to attach to the shell giving the animal inside camouflage from the eyes of predators like fish.
BIVALVES
Among the most valuable and numerous of mollusks, bivalves are found from Arctic seas to warm tropical oceans.
From tiny scallop shells to the largest Tridacna (giant clam), these animals filter and clean the waters of their habitats and serve as food for fishes, other mollusks, marine mammals and humans alike. Their diversity of color, form and shape make them a most interesting study.
Use air-filled balloons instead of helium balloons, which get into marine environments where they are eaten by whales and other marine mammals, birds, fish and sea turtles.
To learn more, look for the Pearls of Wisdom throughout the hall.

---new item--

LAND SNAILS OF THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE
The shapes, colors and patterns of these New World terrestrial mollusks are the reason many of them have been used by earlier civilizations as decorative and religious objects and symbols. They have been worn as adornments of beauty and in clusters on wrists, waists and ankles for the making of rhythmic sounds in ceremonies. There are approximately 35,000 species of mollusks that spend their whole lives on land.
In Florida, the Liguus tree snails continue to be studied for their multitudes of forms and how they relate to their isolated habitats. The fascinating Cuban tree snails are even more diverse in their individually isolated habitats. Researchers are now trying to better understand them and their relationships within their known ecosystems.
LAND SNAILS OF THE EASTERN HEMISPHERE
Less well-known than marine mollusks, land snails from around the world are among the most unique forms of molluscan life.
Humans have long appreciated consuming certain species of snails, especially in European countries, but the practice is expanding worldwide recently, as farm raising becomes more productive and efficient. Some species have become invasive species in fragile ecosystems.
Invasive species are those that do not naturally occur in a habitat, but have been accidentally or intentionally introduced. Invasive species such as the very large Achatina marginata (giant African snail) from Africa have caused millions of dollars of damage to crops and agriculture. Invasive species have directly resulted in the extinction of many endemic land snails, especially in the Hawaiian Islands.
The colors and patterns may seem to make them stand out and be more visible to predators. But they, like the green tree snails from Manus Island, Papua New Guinea, which live high in certain trees among its very green leaves, become almost invisible in their natural habitat.

---new item--

LARGE VOLUTIDAE
As members of one family of mollusks, the volutes contain most of the largest of the marine gastropods in their numbers.
All of these are important sources of protein in the diet of many South Pacific island nations. One animal can feed a family for days. Most of the shells are used as tools, such as bailer shells that are used to remove, or bail, water from canoes and small boats.
VOLUTIDAE CYMBIOLA
BRODERIPII - VARIATIONS
Amazing in the many possible colors, patterns and forms, this species of volutes is only one of the diverse species of marine mollusks that can show such wide variations. This is one of the commonly known group of shells known as bailer shells. This particular group of shells took many years to assemble in order to exemplify the diversity possible in any living species.

---new item--

LARGE BIVALVES
Bivalve mollusks are familiar shells that are often found washed up on a beach. They have many techníques for survival. Some live their whole lives buried in sand or mud like pen shells. Others live attached to rocks, corals or other mollusks. Still others can propel themselves through the water like scallops by opening and closing their two sides, or valves, quickly, All bivalves are filter feeders straining their food from the water and ejecting what they do not need.
Many bivalves are enjoyed as food by humans as well as other marine predators.
Filtering water at home and the office means fewer plastic containers in refuse sites and on beaches.
o learn more, look for the Pearls of Wisdom throughout the hall.
LARGE GASTROPODS
These shells are the homes of many of the largest shelled marine mollusks. Only a few mollusks, such as the giant clam and some squid and octopus species, grow larger. Most of these shown here are predator species and for a predator, size does make a difference.
1 Melo amphora, ML.»
Philippines
2 Chicoreus ramosus, on 00108
Sato Istand, Visayas, Phitippines
3 Hatiotis rufescens, M.M
Fort Bragg, Mendocino County California, Us
4 Cassis tuberosa, MA.P
5 Tonna tankervillil, M.SAP
Mn Can Bay Queenstand, Australia
6 Melo amphora, MA.SA
notonesta
7 Charonia variegata, wi.»
• Hexaplex radix, MA.sA
10 Lobatus goliath, MI.M

---new item--

RUFFLES AND FLOURISHES
Appreciation of the many delicate forms of mollusk shells is not only visual but functional as well. Long spines present defense from predators and strengthen shell structure. Ruffled wings add stability in strong currents and aid in the strength of delicate, thin shell parts. Function can also be visibly exciting and inspiring.
Many forms of our daily lives are reflected from nature's mollusks.
The perfect geometry of spiral shells has inspired architecture and design for centuries.

---new item--

USED BY MAN AS FOOD
Oysters, clams, mussels and scallops remain popular foods. Abalone and conch meat are costly but desirable foods also. In order to provide adequate amounts of these popular foods, man is learning to raise some mollusks in farms. Abalone species are being raised in several areas around the world, as are the popular conch shells from the Caribbean.
The small Strombus Lobatus gigas, or Queen Conch, in the bottom center is from one of the farms raising these mollusks in Florida. The aqua abalone shells in the center of the exhibit are from an abalone farm.
The addition of dry milk powder to their diet provides additional calcium and protein, allowing the animals to grow faster and develop the beautiful aqua color of the shells. In California, the red abalone, or Haliotis rufescens, is being raised in small farms along the coast, helping to save the wild populations.
MOLLUSKS USED BY MAN
Currency, adornment, art, religious symbols, communication and functional tools-all have been uses of shells by humans throughout history.
Many of these uses continue today. Communication has turned into music, made using shells as wind instruments. Art and religious symbols continue to function in our society.
Shells have been used as currency in many early civilizations. The money cowries and cut and drilled forms, such as the examples at the top of the case, were used as currency by many different and wide-spread civilizations. Adornments to clothing, such as buttons made from freshwater clams, marine bivalves and abalone shells, are less frequently used now.
The most popular use seems to have been and continues to be jewelry, such as cameos carved from shells, necklaces and other forms of adornment. Shells continue to be admired as objects of beauty and design.

---new item--

COLOR FORMS
Variations within a species occur due to several factors. Heredity, environment and available food can all contribute to the possible variations of individual shells. Dissolved iron from rusty, sunken ships can cause a mollusk to add this red color to its shell; copper and other minerals can cause other colors to develop in the shell. Some species almost never vary, while others display significant ranges in many colors and hues.
COLOR FORMS
WITHIN A SPECIES
Color within a species can consistently be repeated generation after generation with little or no variability, but some pass along the possibility of numerous colors in their shells.
However some rarely produce significant color changes. As a mollusk gets older it may lose the ability to produce color altogether.
VARIATIONS OF A SINGLE SPECIES
This species of the family Volutidae is commonly called the Bat Volute (Cymbiola vespertilio) and has a limited range of habitats. While most are found in the islands of the Philippines, they can also occasionally be found in Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and northernmost Australia. Not only is color a visual variation, but the range of shell forms has also occasionally made identifications difficult.

---new item--

HYBRIDIZATION IN MOLLUSKS
The breeding of different species is a rarely seen phenomenon in mollusks. When it does occur, it presents challenges for researchers and collectors to correctly identify them as true hybrids. As different parent species impart some of their own characteristics to their offspring, some characteristics are more dominant, giving the hybrid offspring many possibilities for new forms. Trying to identify what characteristic was inherited from which parent can be challenging even for experts.
What characteristics do you see?

---new item--

MOLLUSKS AS FOOD FOR OTHER ANIMALS
As part of the cycle of life in any habitat, mollusks are consumed by other organisms like fish, sea stars and other mollusks. Here are shells found in the stomachs of some of those predators.
Numbers 1 through 10 were found in the stomachs of large sea stars. Numbers 11 through 18 are from the stomachs of fish, while numbers 19 and 20 were consumed by predators like number 21, Triplofusus gigantea from Florida.
Dispose of all plastics responsibly, reuse and recycle whenever possible.
To learn more, look for the Pearls of Wisdom throughout the hall.

---new item--

SAME OR DIFFERENT?
These pairs of shells exhibit many similar characteristics, such as color, shape and pattern, but differences can also be possible in a single species. Some species so closely resemble others that onty by the close inspection of the living animal can they be correctly identified.
Test your differentiating skills on the interactive screen for the correct answers. Same or Different?
You decide!

---new item--

MALACOLOGY
WHAT ARE MOLLUSKS?
Malacology is the study of the animals known as mollusks and their shells, if present. As one of the most numerous of the invertebrates, mollusks occupy habitats from the tops of wtrees to the bottom of the oceans. Divided into seven classes, the most familiar to us are the Gastropoda, having around 90,000 species, and the Bivalvia, which number some 25,000 recognized species.
Less numerous classes are the:
• Polyplacophora (chitons)
• Cephalopoda (squids, octopuses, cuttlefishes and nautiluses)
• Scaphopoda (tusk shells)
• Monoplacophora (limpet-like, deep sea)
• Aplacophora (shell-less, worm-like)
Of the seven classes of mollusks, almost all outdoor environments. Freshwater mollusks
have an external shell or pair of shells (like
live worldwide in creeks, streams, ponds,
the bivalves). Squids, octopuses, argonauts,
lakes and rivers. As science finds better ways
nudibranchs and sea slugs have no external
to explore deep ocean habitats, rainforests
shell. What separates the nudibranchs and secluded islands, new species are being
and sea slugs is the external gills of the discovered with some regularity.
nudibranchs while sea slugs' gills are held internally within their body, or mantle.
Most nudibranchs are carnivorous, and sea slugs graze on algae.
Marine mollusks are the most familiar to us because we can see the shells produced by the living animals. Land snails are also recognizable because we can find them in our gardens. Land snails include those that have no shell, such as slugs found in our
The beauty of the animals that built the shells in our exhibits is something we can see, but the importance of the animals to humanity is limitless. New medicines, methods of construction and sources of food keep the study of mollusks highly significant, and protecting them and their environments is a necessary endeavor for humankind's future.
Look for ways each of us can help save them throughout this exhibit by finding the Pearls of Wisdom symbol.

---new item--

REPAIRS MADE BY MOLLUSKS
Occasionally mollusk shells are found that have grown in ways not consistent with the usual form of a species. Some are the result of an injury to the living animal either by the dangers of reef life, such as breakage from storms, or from attacks by predators like fish or crustaceans. In such instances, the parts of the animal governing growth of the calcium carbonate shell are damaged but do not result in the animal's death. The continued growth results in new forms of the shell.
Other things can affect the natural growth of the animal, such as chemicals in the water. These are usually associated with the runoff of substances from rivers into ocean habitats. Such runoffs cause many disastrous problems in those areas.
Some areas are still affected, such as Vietnam, where dangerous chemicals continue flowing down rivers into ocean habitats.
Reusable shopping bags can help a household eliminate thousands of plastic bags from waste disposal or ending up in marine and freshwater environments every year.
To learn more, look for the Pearls of Wisdom throughout the hall.

---new item--

GRAZERS
Sea grasses and algae are important foods for many marine animals. Some mollusks like Cypraea (cowries), Strombus (conchs), Polyplacophora (chitons) and others are also known as grazers. Just as cows, goats and sheep consume grasses, so do these miniature animals rely on the plants of the oceans for their survival.
From giant kelp forests and turtle and eel grasses to algae-covered sea floors, these mollusks help keep the balance of nature in check. Still others feed on sponges, gorgonians and even corals. Many deep water Cyprea can be seen feeding on sponges by R.O.V. (remotely-operated vehicles). The nutrient-rich sea floor also supports many mollusks that help keep the environment clean.
Used oil and grease should be placed in containers for recycling or disposed of by refuse pick-up.
Pouring these products into drains causes toxic wastes to get into bay and ocean environments where fish, crabs and birds raise their young.
To learn more, look for the Pearls of Wisdom throughout the hall.

---new item--

ALFRED C. GLASSELL, JR. HALL
BLACK MARLIN
Istiompax indica
ropical Pecic and Indian ocane
BLUE MARLIN
Makaira nigricans
Tropical and temperate oceans worffveta
WAHOO
Acanthocybium solandri
Tropical and temperate oceans worldwide
GREAT HAMMERHEAD SHARK
Sphyrna mokarran
Tropical and sub-tropical coastal zones worldwid
DUSKY DOLPHIN
Lagenorhynchus obscurus
Tropical and sub-tropical coastal zones
COMMON THRESHER SHARK
Alopias vulpinus
ROOSTERFISH
Nematistius pectoralis
Eastern tropical Pacific ocean
YELLOWFIN TUNA
Thunnus albacares
COMMON DOLPHINFISH
Coryphaena hippurus
AFRICAN POMPANO
Alectis ciliaris
SHARKSUCKER REMORA
Echinis naucrates

---new item--

CLEANED AND UNCLEANED
Each of these pairs of shells demonstrates how shells appear in their marine habitats. Once a shell has had the encrusting forms of sea life removed we see the beauty beneath. Such forms of sea life provide the protection of camouflage from predators.
PEARLS -
Of the few organic, naturally formed gems, natural pearls are the rarest and highly valued, especially those used in jewelry. Cultured pearls are more commonly found but also highly prized for their beauty and less costly availability.
All pearls come.from some form of mollusk. Bivalves, such as pearl oysters, produce the well-known South Sea pearls.
Any mollusk is capable of producing a pearl if a foreign body is introduced into the living tissue of the mollusk. The resulting irritation causes the animal to cover the irritant with layer after layer of the calcium carbonate material that it uses to cover the interior of its shell. Examples of these pearls are shown with their host shell.
PEARLIZED AND NORMAL SHELLS
Commonly used as decorative objects, shells that have had the outer layers of calcium carbonate removed now appear as pearlized shells. By using hydrochloric acid to remove the colorful outer layers of shell material, the lovely pearly interior layers are revealed. Pearl buttons are made using this method. Shown here are pairs of shells in the natural and pearlized states to show their inner beauty. Some mollusks, specifically those in the bivalve families Pteriidae (pearl oysters) and Unionidae (freshwater mollusks) and the gastropod family Haliotidae (abalones), have naturally iridescent inner shell surfaces.

---new item--

CAMOUFLAGE
Camouflage for many mollusks is very important for survival. Since most mollusks are slow-moving or do not move at all, the best chance for surviving predators is to be hidden from view. Some attach to other shells or debris from their habitats.
Others grow elaborate outer skins called periostracum. Still others allow things like barnacles, worm shells, corals and algae to attach themselves in order to disguise them from predators.

---new item--

LIFE BEGINS
Some mollusks lay eggs and some spawn by releasing large numbers of eggs and sperm into the water where they are fertilized.
When egg cases release or "hatch," the tiny newborn mollusks already have a thin shell and are ready to start life in their habitats.
Mollusks that do not lay eggs release vast amounts of eggs or sperm which, when joined together, produce free-swimming veligers that can travel many miles to new habitats.
Some female egg-laying mollusks form groups or "aggregations" to lay their eggs in large masses, which helps keep predators from destroying all the young from a single female's eggs. These egg cases are occasionally seen by beachcombers as they wash ashore after most eggs have hatched their young.

---new item--

CORAL REEF HABITATS
As the foundation to support the life of the thousands of species of organisms present, a coral reef is one of the most diverse habitats on Earth.
Fish, invertebrates and marine mammals rely on the structure and life of the corals that make up the reef system, which provides food, shelter, egg-depositing or spawning opportunities and protection from storms.
Many kinds of organisms can be seen in one small area of reef. Crustaceans (crabs, shrimps, etc.), echinoderms (urchins and sea stars) and mollusks with and without their shells can be found with some of the beautiful corals that contribute to the daily survival of a healthy reef system. These coral reefs are under threat around the world due to the warming of the oceans, acidification from pollution and predators, such as the crown-of-thorns starfish. Unfortunately human impact on reefs is one of the greatest threats.
We can choose to make changes that can save coral reefs around the world, thus saving the oceans as well. Since our survival is based in large part on the health of the oceans, we can make the decision to dispose of waste, like chemicals, plastics and garbage, in responsible ways. Each of us can make a difference in saving Earth's resources, such as coral reefs and all the organisms dependent on them, because by saving them, we are saving our planet for further generations.

---new item--

THE STRESSES OF
•LIFE IN THE OCEANS
Everywhere in the world, marine life and their environments' continue to battle for survival. The rising temperatures of the oceans, overfishing for food, the dumping of waste and careless disposal of plastics all contribute to the ever-increasing dangers marine animals face.
Even sunken ships cause rust to infiltrate everything surrounding them, including the foods eaten by mollusks, causing the shells to absorb this often toxic mineral.
The responsible use and clean-up of fishing line and nets can help save thousands of fish, birds, marine and land animals, mollusks and crustaceans.
To learn more, look for the Pearls of Wisdom
Mnroughout the nall.

---new item--

ANOMALIES
Shells that display unusual characteristics not consistent with the normal formation of a species are referred to as anomalies.
An unsuccessful attack by a predator causing damage to the living animal may result in the new shell growth form changing in odd ways, but survival continues. Even from birth,
unusual forms or colors may appear
as inherited traits, such as the left-handed aperture as opposed to the more common right-handed aperture, which can be passed down from parent to offspring.

---new item--

SENSORY
The feel of a shell can tell you a lot about the kind of mollusk you are touching. For instance, some predatory mollusks use their sharp, strong edges to pry open the bivalves on which they feed. Long, slender shells usually spend their lives under the sandy or muddy bottoms of their habitats and emerge to feed on their prey. Living under the sand or mud gives protection from predators looking for a meal.
Some shells are very smooth like glass. This is the result of the many layers of nacre the mollusk produces to keep the outside of their shell clean and smooth enough so they can emerge to feed in comfort. Most numerous of these are the Cypraea and Oliva species. Many have spines, spikes or knobs on the tops of their shells that add strength to their shells and provide some protection from predators.
The animals that produce these shells are not crabs; but are similar to the snails found in your garden. They have infinite forms, textures and patterns which serve a purpose for the mollusks' ability to survive in their environments.

---new item--

Far right case
COLOR:
WHERE DOES IT COME FROM?
Yellow, red, green and even blue colors can be found in mollusk shells. Many characteristics are inherited, but other factors can contribute to changes in the colors available to a mollusk as it grows and adds new shell to its home. Dissolved minerals in the water and food of a mollusk can cause new colors as it grows and adds to its calcium carbonate shell. Some even use the colors of the food it consumes to help make it less visible to predators.
Right case
SAND AND BOTTOM DWELLERS
Many mollusks spend their whole lives on or living in the sand or mud bottom of their habitats. Some even live buried in the sand or mud of their habitat and never move except to continue growing, such as members of the Pinnidae family (pen shells) and Penicillidae (watering pots). Others move above and below the sandy or muddy bottom to search for food such as Terebridae (Terebras) and Olividae (olives) and to hide from predators.
Left case
ADULTS AND JUVENILES OF THE SAME SPECIES
As mollusks age they must enlarge their calcium carbonate shell to accommodate their growing bodies. Special glands near the outer edge of the animal's body, or mantle, can secrete the components necessary to harden and allow the growth of the animal within.
These examples of juvenile and adult shells illustrate the growth of each species. Most juveniles will not survive to adulthood, making these examples even more rare.

---new item--

ALFRED C. GLASSELL, JR. HALL
GIANT SQUID
Architeuthis dux
Giant squids, (Architeuthis dux) have mystified and excited our imaginations for hundreds of years, inspiring myths and stories that have continued into modern times. Until recently, all we knew about them was learned from dead specimens washed ashore or accidentally caught in fishing nets. In 2012, actual footage of a live giant squid was made by a team of Japanese scientists and filmmakers in the deep ocean around Japan. It was a female specimen that had lost its two longest tentacles, so its correct length was not able to be measured. The largest dead specimen to date measured 43 feet in length. The beaks of giant squids have been found in the stomachs of Sperm Whales which are its only known predator. Scars from the squid's suckers on the arms and tentacles are frequently seen on Sperm Whales.
Squids are invertebrate Molluscs and you can learn more about Molluscs here in the Strake Hall of Malacology.
As we continue to learn more about the deep ocean habitats, we are increasingly motivated to protect this mysterious realm. The exploration of the oceans will continue to solve many mysteries and reveal new species.

---new item--

WHAT IS AN ECOSYSTEM?
An ecosystem includes all plants animals, and the environmen hey interact with, which
together form a self-contained entity A good example incudes the African Lowveld ecosystem portrayed here, with producers, consumersand scavangers. Plants are producers providing energy to primary consumer such as zebra, which are prey taken by predators.
The zebra provide
nouris ment to secondary consumers, which include predators such as lions. Scavengers such as vultures and hyenas are the environmental cleaners, insuring the Lowveld is void of deceased animal remains.
Lowveld Habitat - Lowveld means "low bush", referring to the vegetative cover in this specialized habitat.
Lowveld characterizes
the vast majority of Kruger National Park, located in northeastern South Africa. This special ecosystem is wedged between the Drakensberg mountain range to the west, and the Limpopo River to the east.

---new item--

PERILOUS MIGRATIONS
The Saharan Desert is the greatest single challenge for birds that migrate back and forth between Europe and sub-saharan Africa.
Covering most of the northern third of the African continent, it takes a songbird 35 to 40 hours to fly across this vast desert, and many birds cross this desert at night to avoid the strong heat. There are many other perils for birds to avoid during migration: avoiding traps or predators such as house cats, avoiding hitting a tower or window, avoiding environmental extremes such as drought, or destroyed habitat at their destination.
Maintaining energy
reserves is very important to migrating birds - if a bird runs out of fuel it will often perish. During migration many species will stop to 'refuel' by eating or drinking, even in some of the most unlikely environments, such as the Saharan desert.
Saharan Desert - This vast north African desert comprises nearly one-third of the continent. The vast Sahara spans Morocco, Algeria, Libya, Egypt, Mauritania, and the northern portions of Mali, Niger, Chad and Sudan.

---new item--

SAHARA

---new item--

LOWVELD

---new item--

OKAVANGO

---new item--

LIFE NEEDS WATER TO SURVIVE
The Okavango Delta has been called the Jewel of Africa, a shimmering green sapphire of vast wetland in an otherwise relatively dry region. The delta is very important as a water reservoir, seasonally supplying water to the otherwise dry Kalahari desert. Wetland habitats such as the Okavange Pella are crucial to wildlife and hut ars aike
For
example, more than half artas loman body is made up of water. By havine sound conservation goals estaplished we can help preserve valuable habitats such as wetlands, for wildlife and humans alike, in Africa, Texas and elsewhere on the planet.
Okavango Delta - In stark contrast to the drier parts of Africa, the Okavango Delta is a haven for wetland fauna. This specialized region is restricted to northwestern Botswana.

---new item--

AFRICAN ELEPHANTS
Elephants have the distinction of being the largest living land animal on the planet. There are actually two species in Africa, those from the Savannah (Loxodonta africana) that you see in this diorama, and a smaller species that lives in forest, aptly called the Forest Elephant
(L. cyclotis). Additionally Asia harbors several subspecies of Asian Elephant (Elephas maximus), including the Pygmy Elephant
endemic to Borneo. These living species are the last of a lineage of much more hairy relatives that walked the planet during the Pleistocene,
known as Mammoths (Mammuthus primigenius) and
Mastodons (Mammut americanum).
Elephants are vital landscape architects in the tropical regions they inhabit. They are important for seed dispersal, carrying seeds to spawn and grow away from the parent plant. Moreover, they are important at molding landscapes, removing plants that would otherwise monopolize a habitat, providing a variety of refugia for smaller animals by toppling trees onto their sides, and other important roles. Indeed, in areas where elephant populations have exceeded the number that can be comfortably supported at a given site, the landscape becomes quite denuded.
Unfortunately elephants are tied to the one thing that is as coveted by some cultures as gold or diamonds—ivory. The demand for the illegal trade in ivory has pushed elephants to the brink of extinction in many areas. In some regions of Africa, tuskless elephants have been evolutionarily favored over their tusked brethren. If elephants don't have tusks they are of little value to poachers and thus not hunted, which means tuskless genes are carried forth to future generations.

---new item--

SPECIATION AND DESCRIBING NEW SPECIES
ew species evolve via a number of different modes, the most ommon of which involves isolation. Oceanic islands are perhaps he first and most extreme form of isolation, but such 'islands' an also form on mainlands. Imagine a mountaintop where the pecies inhabiting the very top is unable to exist at lower elevations. That's an island barrier. Other examples include species cratered in valleys between mountains or rivers, or other barriers created by contrasting habitats. Over evolutionary millennia, those species with a common ancestor undergo separate trajectories with their own unique set of adaptations, such that ultimately they are very different. Distinguishing and describing these new forms is the job of a museum zoologist, such as HMNS' Curator of Vertebrate Zoology, Dr. Dan Brooks.
On occasion one stumbles upon a new species while examining museum specimens or running DNA analyses and noticing
something distinct. These tandem situations led to the description of four new species of African House Bats:
Livingstone's (Scotophilus livingstonii) of tropical central Africa, Andrew Rebori's (S. andrewreborii) and Trujillo's (S. trujilloi) of Kenya, and Ejetai's (S. ejetai) from Ethiopia. Firming this up with morphological and DNA analyses led to the description of these four new species in 2014 by Dr. Brooks and his colleague, Dr. John Bickham. You can see displayed the new taxon Andrew Rebori's House Bat (S. andrewreborii), which was thought to be African Yellow House Bat (S. dinganii) until DNA and morphological analysis proved otherwise. Brooks named the new form Scotophilus andrewreborii in honor of Andrew Rebori, longtime friend and family member of HMNS Collections staff. In the Etymology section of the monograph describing the new species, Brooks wrote: "It is our honor to name this species for Andrew N.
Rebori (1948-2011). Rebori unknowingly touched the lives and
inspired many individuals, including many museum professionals.
He always maintained a keen interest in animals..."
While describing new species may seem glamorous, it is incredibly grueling, painstaking work. Dealing with international permits for collecting, organizing personnel and logistics, making the long trip and returning in one piece, preparing the specimens, finely examining a plethora of study skins and analyzing specimens under a powerful microscope is hardly work to be envied. More often than not, results in fatigue and a really good night's sleep. Imagine looking at 10 or 20 different measurements of 50 or more bat skulls-with an entire skull being the size of your fingernail, and half of those measurements being of the surfaces of different types of teeth. It's enough to cause splitting headaches and often does.

---new item--

ETHIOPIAN REALM

---new item--

LIVING TOGETHER IN HARMONY
The tropics in general support the highest levels of biodiversity, containing more species of animals than any other region on our planet. This is achieved by animals using different niches within their environment. A niche is the place an animal fills in its environment, and there are many niches available in the tropics. For example, primates will occupy different levels of the forest on a vertical (top to bottom) plane, whereas antelope will forage on different types of vegetation along a horizontal (side to side) plane.
THIOPIAN REALM
in stark contrast to more lush regions of Africa, the Ethiopian region is extremely dry. As the name implies, the Ethiopian realm comprises the majority of Ethiopia, as well as Somalia and northwestern Kenya.

---new item--

CONGO

---new item--

CONGO EXPLORATION
The Congo Basin represents a very specialized African rainforest ecosystem that is about 80% the size of the continental United States. The Congo is difficult to access and work in due to its remote location. Therefore, the animals of this region went relatively unknown until 1900 when the Okapi was discovered. Today the wild population of Okapis is restricted to around 10,000 individuals in the Congo Basin, where they live among in rainforest vegetation. Nonetheless, this unusual species is threatened by poaching for skins and meat, as well as habitat loss.
CONGO BASIN
The Congo Basin was historically covered by extensive tropical forest. Sadly, most of this region has suffered dramatic deforestation, and today, only pockets contain remnants of the historically vast forest cover. The country of Zaire occupies nearly half of this biome, with other countries including Congo, Gabon, southern Cameroon and the Central African Republic (C.A.R.).

---new item--

EQUATORIAL DIVERSITY
As early as 1878, Alfred Russell Wallace, a famous Naturalist and contemporary of Darwin, noted
"animal life is, on the whole, far more abundant and varied within the tropics than in any other part of the globe.. For example, the equatorial
African country of Kenya has well over 1000 species of birds, whereas the number in Texas is 625 species even though Texas is much larger than Kenya. The main reason diversity is higher in the tropics is because there are more niches
available to support more species.
LA DIVERSIDAD ECUATORIAL
Ya en 1878, Alfred Russell Wallace, un famoso naturalista y contemporáneo de Darwin, señalaba
"la vida animal es, en general, más abundante y variada en los trópicos que en cuale
a parte
del globo". Por ejemplo, Kenia
ficano
ecuatorial tiene más de 1000 es
aves,
mientras que Texas tier. 625
aes, aún
cuando Texas es mucho m. jrande que Kenia. La razón de esta mayor diversi ad en los trópicos es porque hay más nichos disponibles para albergar a más especies.

---new item--

THREATENING SURVIVAL IN THE FOREST •
THE BUSHMENT TRADE
In 2002 the bushnean tade claimed 2/500,0001006 el meat sach year i the Congo lasin alone, and 385.000 toms ii Ghana/These are just two countres in the Airican troptes where the bushmesk trade in vampa - all game harvested i not sustanable, and in most cases posched (hunted Megaly), Unfortunately the bushmest induskry has arven many larger ammal species that yield protem to near or complete extinction, More than 50 species of mammals found in Airicon tropical forest, such as primates and fores antelone, se highly thweatened wnh extinction due to the bushest trade,

---new item--

THE TEXAS COAST
The Texas coast stretches for 367 miles between Louisiana and Mexico, spanning 18 Texas counties. In addition, there are seven major protected bays and estuaries formed by five barrier islands and two major peninsulas.
Ecology of the Texas Coast
The Texas coast is a wonderful natural laboratory
for the study of ecology. Ecology is the study of how organisms interact with their environment.
Marine life abounds in these widely varied habitats, which include everything from northern bays and estuaries with a lot of rainfall and low salinity to South Texas' semi-arid, hypersaline waters.
The entire outer coast is dominated by sandy beaches, while visitors to the upper and middle coast bays will be greeted with salt marshes and oyster reefs. The lower coast of Laguna Madre is home to seagrass beds and wind-tidal flats. Each of these coastal areas is home to an astoundingly diverse array of plant and animal life.
The 367 mile long Texas coast is often divided into three segments or regions because of its great length and the differing natural and anthropogenic characteristics of each area: Upper, Middle, and Lower Coast. Although these are arbitrary divisions of the coast and there are no distinctive lines that separate them, we have chosen to divide the coast in this fashion in the Hamman Hall for ease of presentation and discussion of the various areas. Each segment is approximately 125 miles in length and has six Texas counties.
The Hamman Hall of Texas Coastal Ecology will teach visitors about the diversity of life and habitate along the Texas coast, as well as the impacts that humans are having on these natural systems and what conservation measures are needed to sustain the coast for future generations.

---new item--

Disappearing Oyster Reefs
Once, oyster reefs were both highly important and incredibly common in estuaries around the world, providing a structural and ecological component that fueled coastal economies for centuries.
For years, oysters supported civilization as an easy-to-collect source of food. However, a recent global survey revealed that 85% of all oyster reefs on earth are now gone. This once flourishing habitat is now threatened on a global scale.
The Gulf of Mexico is home to some of the best and largest remaining oyster reefs in the world.
Even so, overharvesting, pollution, and dredging for shells used in industrial processes have taken a toll on these reefs, and there is a great need for conservation and restoration to recover this important species and habitat.

---new item--

The Eastern Oyster
The Eastern oyster (Crassostrea virginica) has often been called an ecosystem engineer, because they not only produce their own habitat, but habitat for an entire ecosystem.
In addition to habitat, oyster reefs provide many ecosystem services, including water filtration, food, shoreline stabilization and protection, and fisheries.
The Eastern oyster ranges from Canada to Texas along the Atlantic coast and into the Gulf of Mexico. It lives in the intertidal and subtidal waters of our estuaries, preferring the upper parts of bays where freshwater rivers result in a slightly lower concentration of salt.
Despite this, they can survive in high salinity environments, although disease and parasites, as well as predators like stone crabs and oyster drills, do take a toll.

---new item--

Oyster reef habitat of the Bay Area. In addition to providing an important fishery, oysters provide a hard substrate for a diverse array of other organisms.
1 - Crassostrea virginica (oyster)
2 - Balanus sp. (acorn barnacles)
3 - Serpulid polychaete worms
4 - Mussels
5 - Tunicates (sea squirts)
6 - Stramonita haemastoma (rock snail)
7 - Crepidula fornicata (slipper shell)
8 - Corophium sp. (amphipod)
9 - Nereid polychaete worm
10 - Libinia dubia (spider crab)
11 - Menippe adina (stone crab)
12 - Pogonias cromis (black drum)

---new item--

Birth and Death
Oysters spawn in estuaries where their eggs and larvae are very common. The young larvae must have a hard surface, preferably an oyster reef, to settle on and grow. Juvenile oysters, called spat, are less than one inch in size. It takes about 18-24 months for the young oysters to grow to three inches or more, what is considered market size.
Oyster reef shells, both living and dead, form the foundation for the oyster reef community. This diverse habitat includes many species of algae, invertebrates, and fish. Acorn barnacles and worm tubes attach themselves to the oyster shells, and several kinds of sponges, worms, and bivalves actually bore into the shells.
Mussels, snails, crabs, snapping shrimp, and small fish live among the oyster shells, and larger fish are found around the reefs feeding

---new item--

Eastern Oyster
Crassostrea virginica

---new item--

Blue Crab
Callinectes sapidus

---new item--

Known as ecosystem engineers, oysters
build thie
s in areas where many other
species live resulting in high biodiversity.
Ecosystem services include:
• Water filtration
• Food and habitat
• Shoreline stabilization and protection
• Fisheries
The oyster reefs within the Gulf of Mexico are some of the healthiest in the world.
The Eastern oyster ranges from Canada to Texas.
Oysters grow best in lower salinity, brackish waters; they can grow in higher salinity, but have trouble with disease, parasites, and predators.
Oysters are a favorite seafood item for many people.
Galveston Bay is the most important area for oyster harvest in Texas.
Salinity
The salinity of water refers to how much salt is in it. Water with low salinity has very little salt. Water with high salinitiy has a lot of salt.
Hypersalinity refers to coastal or ocean with waters higher than normal ocean salinity. Waters that are a mixture of fresh water and salt are referred to as brackish.

---new item--

Economic Importance
Galveston Bay is the primary oyster fishing bay in Texas. Other bays include Matagorda, Aransas, and Copano. These bays serve as important economic centers for the fishing industry, providing an abundance of seafood to communities. Healthy oyster reefs are also a favorite place for recreational fishermen, given the diversity of these areas.
Unfortunately, in 2008, Hurricane Ike damaged many of the oyster reefs in Galveston Bay, covering them with sediment.

---new item--

The Restoration of the Reefs
Recognizing both the ecological and the economic importance of oyster reefs, organizations have begun to investigate their restoration.
The once large and famous Half Moon Reef in Matagorda Bay almost disappeared entirely due to overfishing and other issues. It has now been partially restored due to the work of The Nature Conservancy, re-establishing it with limestone rocks and restoring ecological function while preventing oyster fishing activities. This project has been a great success, with many oysters now growing on the new, limestone substrate.
The "Sink Your Shucks Program", developed by the Harte Research Institute for Gulf of Mexico Studies at Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi, is a restoration program that encourages seafood restaurants to recycle oyster shells to shrinking reef areas to promote growth.

---new item--

BALD CYPRESS KNESS, TRINITY DELTA AREA,
LAKE CHARLOTTE, WALLISVILLE, CHAMBERS COUNTY
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE

---new item--

SALT MARSH, GALVESTON BAY
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE

---new item--

GREAT EGRET FISHING
IN MARSHY POND
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE

---new item--

HABITAT

---new item--

BALD CYPRESS KNESS, TRINITY DELTA AREA,
LAKE CHARLOTTE, WALLISVILLE, CHAMBERS COUNTY

---new item--

BABY ALLIGATORS SUNNING ALONG SHORELINE,
BRAZOS BEND STATE PARK
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE

---new item--

AMERICAN ALLIGATOR, BRAZOS BEND STATE PARK
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE

---new item--

ROSEATE SPOONBILL FLYING
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE
WILDLIFE
BABY ALLIGATORS SUNNING ALONG SHORELINE,
BRAZOS BEND STATE PARK

---new item--

RECREATION
BIRD WATCHING OVER SALT MARSH AT SUNRISE
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE
KAYAK FISHERMAN AT SUNRISE
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE

---new item--

HUGE WAVE CRASHING ON GALVESTON SEAWALL DURING
HURRICANE IKE RIGHT BEHIND THE 1900 HURRICANE MEMORIAL STATUE
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE
IMPACTS
HURRICANE IKE STORM DAMAGE AND DEBRIS
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE

---new item--

RESTORATION
DUNE RESTORATION ON GALVESTON ISLAND
PHOTO COURTESY OF JIM OLIVE

---new item--

UPPER COAST
The upper Texas coast is characterized by a large human population centered around Galveston Bay, Galveston Island, the Bolivar Peninsula, and the mainland reaching the coast to the east and west of Galveston. The major natural passes from the bay into the Gulf include Bolivar Pass, which serves as the entrance to the Houston Ship Channel, on the east end of Galveston Island, and San Luis Pass on the west end. The six counties reaching the coast include Orange, Jefferson, Chambers, Harris, Galveston, and Brazoria. There are two main estuaries in this region: Galveston Bay and Sabine Lake, which is situated on the Texas-Louisiana border. There are considerable coastal protected lands along the upper coast, and ecologically the area is characterized by high rainfall and freshwater inflow, which provides good habitat for extensive salt marshes and oyster reefs.

---new item--

Salt Marshes
Salt marshes are the most common shoreline habitat on the upper Texas coast.
Ecosystem services include:
• Important nursery ground for shrimp, crabs, and fish
• Protection and stabilization of shorelines
• Water fibration of run-off from the land
The habitat is dominated by salt marsh cordgrass, but includes many other salt tolerant plants.
These marshes are primarily found in environments with quiet water, llow energy environments and gently Stoping shorelmes.
Salt marshes are split into three regions: the outer/lower marsh, the middle marsh, and the high marsh.
Salt marshes are a type of coastal wetland dominated by salt marsh cordgrass (Spartina alterniflora). This habitat is common on the bay shorelines of the upper Texas coast, where the water has a lower salinity. Moving down the coast, salt marshes become less frequent until disappearing entirely in the Corpus Christi region.
Here, they are replaced by wind tidal flats as the salt content in the water becomes higher.
Because salt marshes tend to exist in calm water, with little in the way of waves or currents, they are oiten found near river deltas and upper bay areas along the coast. Fine, sott sediments and muds make up the surface of the salt marsh habitat, and the shoreline tends to be low and gently sloping.
Although salt marsh cordgrass is the dominant species of the outer or lower marsh, many other plant species occur landward of it. In the middle marsh, common species include saltwort, glasswort, sea purslane, and shore grass. In the high marsh, common spadies include sea ox-eye daisy, camphor daisy, saltgrass, seashore dropssed, sea blite, Carolina wolfberry, and sea lavender.

---new item--

the coastline, mediately interior from coastal massi.ons of the most pervasive species of plants dominating grasslands closer to the coast is Saltmeadow Cordgrass (Spartina patens).
These thick bushels of grass punctuate the landscape in thick clusters, often at high densities.
M
igratory geese have diminished annually in recent years since coastal prairie rice crops are being replaced with corn, grown for ethanol, which does not lure the geese in to feed. On a positive note, Mountain Lions (Felis concolor) are returning to east Texas, with records just west of Houston on the Katy Prairie.
The Coastal Prairie is home to a plethora of Threatened and Endangered species. This is initially surprising because of the flat and homogenous nature of prairie grassland, largely void of stands of forest or woodland. Perhaps for this very reason the prairie is in demand for agrarian purposes; it is much easier to convert to grazing pastures or cropland than forest.

---new item--

COASTAL PRAIRIE
STRIPED SKUNK
Mephitis mephitis
BLACK VULTURE
Cathartes aura
10 3713
EASTERN KINGBIRD
Tyrannus tyrannus
VO 511, 766
MOUNTAIN LION
Felis concolor
VM 324
Gift ot Chet coumes
FERAL HOG
Sus scrofa
AMERICAN BISON
Bison bison
ATTWATER'S PRAIRIE CHICKE
Tympanuchus cupido attwateri
WHITE-TAILED HAWK
Buteo albicaudatus
VO 152
Netorg curt firo feme ned ..
AMERICAN KESTREL
Falco sparverius
VO 894
AMERICAN PIPIT
Anthus rubescens
VO 552-553
LOGGERHEAD SHRIL
Lanius ludovicianus
VO 803, 817
Nationally (USF&WS): Conserva
NORTHERN MOCKINGBIRD
Mimus polyglottos
WHITE-FOOTED MOUSE
Peromyscus leucopus
M 1338
COMMON SNIPE
Gallinago gallinago
VO 255, 696, 836
EASTERN MEADOWLARK
Sturnella magna
VO 633-634, 731
CATTLE EGRET
Bubulcus ibis
WHITE-FRONTED GOOSE
Anser albifrons
10 73-74, 3243
SANDHILL CRANE
Grus canadensis
/0 232-233
BARN OWL
Tyto alba
VO 931
BROWN-HEADED COWBIRD
Molothrus ater
VO 782-783
COMMON G
Quiscalus
WHITE FRONTED GOOSK
Anser albifrons
SNOW GOOSE
Ansor caerulescens
ROSS' GOOSE
Anser 10981
BARN OWL
Tyto alba
SHORT-EARED OWL
Asio flammeus
COMMON NIGHTHAWK
Chordelles minor
DOWNY WOODPECKER
Picoldes pubescens
JED COWBIRD
rus ater
32-783
COMMON GRACKLE
Quiscalus quiscula
VO 860
GREAT-TAILED GRACKLE
Quiscalus mexicanus
SAVANNAH SPARROW
Passerculus sandwichensis
VO 847
GULF COAST TOAD
Bufo valliceps

---new item--

Some of these, like terns and the Black Skimmer, prefer areas with low elevation and vegetation, where they hollow out a small depression in the sand to lay their eggs. These are called ground nesters, and their eggs are always well-camouflaged to blend in with their surroundings.
Other birds, such as the heron and egrets, are considered shrub nesters. They build their nests in low vegetation, brush, or even trees to keep their chicks away from predators. The nests are made of twigs, sticks, and grass from the surrounding island area.
Protecting the colonial waterbirds and their nesting sites is an incredibly important conservation effort. The National Audubon Society gained national recognition in the early 1900s by raising awareness of the shooting of many colonial waterbirds for their feathers in the millinery trade. Today, Audubon remains instrumental

---new item--

to the protection of birds across the U.S., and Audubon Texas is important specifically for their work in protecting the colonial nesting sites along the Texas coast.
The annual Texas Colonial Waterbird Survey monitors waterbird abundance along the entire Texas coast each year. This monumental effort involves a large number of volunteers who attempt to count all of the colonial waterbirds and their nests. This information is used to better understand the status and population trends of each species as it changes over time.
The Texas Colonial Waterbird Society is an important coalition working to monitor, promote research, and inform the management of colonial waterbird populations in Texas. The partnership includes a number of state and federal agencies, as well as universities and individuals who care about this treasured resource all along the Texas coast.

---new item--

What is an Estuary?
Estuaries exist all along the Texas coast. These partially enclosed areas of water are fed by freshwater rivers and streams, as well as ocean water. This mixture of fresh and salt water is what form an estuary.

---new item--

MIDDLE COAST
Roseate spoonbill
Platalea ajaja

---new item--

Key characteristics for a good rookery or colony location are:
Lack of predators.
Good foraging habitat nearby.
Proper nesting substrate or vegetation.
Lack of human disturbance.

---new item--

Brown Pelican-A Conservation & Restc
(From Audubon Texas website)
Through the early 1900s, shooting for the millinery trade and to "protect" fishing caused a major decline in the Brown Pelican population.
Legal protection began in 1903 when Pelican Island, Florida was set aside as a federal preserve.
Despite this, and despite the birds' longevity and popularity, Brown Pelicans nearly disappeared from North America between the 1950s and the 1970s as a result of pesticide use.
The pesticide endrin killed pelicans outright, and DDT caused thin-shelled eggs that broke under the weight of incubating parents. By 1970 all North American populations, with the exception of a few in Florida, were gone, and the species was placed on the Federal Endangered Species List.

---new item--

Count of Breeding Pairs
Up to 20
•
20-200
•
200-500
•
500-1000
• Over 1000
Changes in Texas Brown Pelican Colonies 1973-2011

---new item--

MIDDLE COAST
The middle Texas coast is characterized by the low human population and large areas of private lands, many of which support ranching and farming. There are three major estuaries or bay systems along this part of the coast:
Matagorda Bay, San Antonio Bay, and Copano Bay.
In addition, there is one large federal protected area for whooping cranes known as the Aransas National Wildlife Refuge. The six counties reaching the coast here are Matagorda, Jackson, Victoria, Calhoun, Refugio, and Aransas. The outer coast is bordered by Matagorda Peninsula, Matagorda Island, and San Jose Island.
Pass Cavallo leads into Matagorda Bay and the ephemeral Cedar Bayou between Matagorda Island and San Jose Island. Ecologically, rainfall and freshwater inflow are lower than the upper coast. As a result, salt marshes and oyster reefs do exist, although they are not as widespread as on the upper coast.

---new item--

Since the Middle Coast is very similar to the Upper Coast habitats with salt marshes and oyster re in many areas, we present the Outer Gulf Coast habitats here. These extend along the entire exa:
Sandy Beaches
Sandy beaches are the dominant outer coast habitat along the Texas shoreline.
Fine grained sandy beaches are derived from land erosion carried by rivers to the sea.
Vegetated dunes protect barrier islands and
the mainland.
The beach foreshore is dominated by animals that live in the sand as well as shorebirds.
The surf zone typically consists of three sand bars
and rows of breakers with worms, snails, clams, and
crustaceans living in the sand.
Unique shell beaches can be found within Padre Island National Seashore in South Texas.
The Anatomy of a Beach
Stretching from the furthest inland point to the water, these areas typically consist of sand dunes, backshore, foreshore, sand bar, and trough.
Sand dunes and the vegetated flats behind them are characterized by a variety of grasses, annuals, and perennials. These dunes are ecologically and economically important, protecting barrier islands and the mainland from storm surges during tropical storms and hurricanes. On the upper Texas coast, these sand dunes are generally only 3-5 feet in height, whereas on the lower coast, along Padre Island, they reach 20-30 feet.
Kangaroo rats, ground squirrels, coyotes, rattlesnakes, and earless lizards live in the sandy dune habitats, while ghost crab burrows are found on the backshore near the dunes. Morning glory vines extend across the backshore, serving as pioneering plants to develop new, embryo dunes. Other plant life includes beach tea, beach evening primrose, and sea purslane.
The change in slope between the dry s wet sand foreshore habitat is called th swash zone, is where the waves consta this is a harsh environment no macro animals are found there. Various shoret foreshore, resting or feeding upon the : in the sand, such as worms, mollusks, small organisms either live in the sand case of the ghost shrimp, or push alon with mole crabs. Coquina clams are als intertidal zone, where they migrate up the tides and waves.
Offshore, there are typically three sandt deeper, forming three rows of breakers subtidal area, known as a bar and trous place with an unstable, sandy bottom. E no rooted or attached plants. Instead, thi
snalls, clams, and crustaceans that are
burrows or down in the sand. Fish of va zone, feeding upon the invertebrates thai
Long shore currents move water and sec generally to the north in the summer an As in most places of the world, heavier
The change in slope between the dry sand backshore and the wet sand foreshore habitat is called the berm. The foreshore, or swash zone, is where the waves constantly wash ashore. Because this is a harsh environment no macro-vegetation and only a few animals are found there. Various shorebirds can be found along the foreshore, resting or feeding upon the small organisms that live in the sand, such as worms, mollusks, and crustaceans. These small organisms either live in the sand in burrows, as in the case of the ghost shrimp, or push along through the sand, as with mole crabs. Coquina clams are also adapted to live in this intertidal zone, where they migrate up and down the beach with the tides and waves.
Offshore, there are typically three sandbars, each progressively deeper, forming three rows of breakers along the coast. This subtidal area, known as a bar and trough zone, is a high energy place with an unstable, sandy bottom. Because of this, there are no rooted or attached plants. Instead, the area is home to worms, snails, clams, and crustaceans that are adapted to living in burrows or down in the sand. Fish of varying sizes live in the surf zone, feeding upon the invertebrates that live here.
Long-shore currents move water and sediments along the beach, generally to the north in the summer and the south in the winter.
As in most places of the world, heavier surf erodes Texas beaches,
Understanding The Tides
Water is constantly on the move, and one cause of this movement is the tide. The shifting tides impact where the shoreline is in relation to the water. At low tide the water recedes to its furthest point. At high tide the water line is at its highest point.
Tides are created primarily by astronomical factors that result from the combined gravitational forces of the Moon, the Sun, and the rotation of the Earth. Sometimes tides are also influenced by
meteorological, or weather-nelated, factors, such
as storms. Wind-tides in the Laguna Madre are a good Texas example
The shoreline itself can be split into different areas based on where it falls in relation to the tides:
Subtidal: This part of the shore is always underwater; during both low and high tides.
Intertidal: During high tide, this area is completely submerged. At low tide, however, it is exposed to the air. Intertidal means between the tides.
Supratidal: Above the high tide line, this area of shore is rarely submerged, although it may be subject to splash and spray.
rogressively oast. This a high energy this, there are me to worms, o living in live in the surf
making them narrower during the winter months and wider during the calmer, summer months. As sea levels rise, a process that has been going on for millennia, barrier islands migrate landward.
Two special shell beaches are found within Padre Island
National Seashore along the South Texas coast, within an area of converging currents. Little Shell Beach is an accumulation of coquina clam shells that form a fine, shelly matrix. To the south of that is Big Shell Beach, which is an accumulation of ark shells that form a coarser shell matrix. These two beaches are very difficult to access or drive through, requiring a four-wheel drive vehicle.
Jetties
Jetties are artificial rocky shores protecting inlets into
Texas ports and harbors.
There are eight major and three minor sets of jetties along the Texas coast.
Ecological zones governed by the tides are common on jetties.
Sea roaches (isopod crustaceans) and periwinkle snails are common in the supratidal zone.
False limpets, fragile barnacles, and fleshy macroalgae dominate the intertidal zone.
Sea urchins are very common subtidally, along with sea anemones, sea whips, bivalves, snails, octopus, crabs, and fish.
be
d wider during rocess that rate landward.
land
in an area imulation of
To the south of ark shells that e very difficult drive vehicle.
There are no natural rocky seashores along the outer Texas coast, but artificial rocky shores exist as "jetties" at various locations.
These exist to protect inlets, or passages through the coast into inner ports and harbors.
Four major sets of jetties protect natural inlets at Sabine, Bolivar, Aransas, and Brazos Santiago. Four additional large jetties are found at the Freeport Ship Channel, Matagorda Ship Channel, Velasco Channel, and Mansfield Cut through Padre Island. Three smaller jetties are found at Rollover Pass, Fish Pass, and Packery Channel.
The first of these larger structures were built in the late 1800s to protect and stabilize natural passes, allowing commercial vessels to pass safely through them. To build them, a bed of limestone rock is laid down as a foundation for granite tops. Granite is used because it is very hard and long-lived, and it is not used by marine boring organisms.
Ecologically, there is a big difference between the unstable sandy beaches along most of the coast and these jetties. The jetties provide a stable surface for the attachment of diverse marine life, both plant and animal.
Different ecological zones are common on these artificial rocky shores, just as they are on naturally rocky coastlines. This zonation is governed by the tides and how long water covers the rocks or splashes and sprays the rocks. Biologists often refer to these zones as follows:
• Supratidal zone: Above the highest tide, receiving only splash or spray.
o In the highest supratidal zone only the sea roach, a scavenging crustacean, is obvious scurrying around over the rocks.
• The lower supratidal zone is home to microalgae that is fed on by herbivorous periwinkle snails.
• Intertidal zone: Between the tides.
• In the upper intertidal zone the false limpet and fragile barnacle are most common.
• The lower intertidal zone houses fleshy macroalgae, such as sea lettuce and other red and brown algae.
• The rocksnail is a common predator in the intertidal zone, and it feeds readily on the false limpet and other bivalves or
snails in this zone.
• Subtidal zone: Below the lowest tide level.
• The red sea urchin is a common herbivore that feeds on all of the abundant sea weeds growing on the jetty rocks.
• Other subtidal organisms include sponges, sea anemones, sea whips, segmented worms, bivalves, snails, octopus, crabs, and many species of fish.

---new item--

American Brown Pelican
Pelecanus occidentalis
American Brown Pelican: A Conservation & Restoration Success Story
(From Audubon Texas website)
Through the early 1900s, shooting for the millinery trade and to "protect" fishing caused a major decline in the Brown Pelican population. Legal protection began in 1903 when Pelican Island, Florida, was set aside as a federal preserve. Despite this, and despite the birds' longevity and popularity, Brown Pelicans nearly disappeared from North America between the 1950s and the 1970s as a result of pesticide use.
The pesticide endrin killed pelicans outright, and DDT caused thin-shelled eggs that broke under the weight of incubating parents. By 1970, most North American populations, with the exception of a few in Florida, were gone, and the species was placed on the Federal Endangered Species List.
DDT use was banned in the United States in 1972, and populations have rebounded since that time.
Their growing abundance in the U.S. since the banning of DDT represents a conservation success story.
The total U.S. population size now exceeds historical levels, the number of breeding pairs in most states is stable, and Audubon Christmas Bird Counts and USGS North American Breeding Bird Survey data show increases. The birds were removed from the Endangered Species List in the southeastern United States in 1985; however, endangered status has been retained throughout the remainder of its range.

---new item--

Freshwater Inflows
A Critical Need for Texas Coastal Bays and Estuaries
When the fresh water of rivers flows into coastal bays and estuaries this is known as freshwater inflow, and it is a critical element of estuarine health. Unfortunately, due to expanding human populations and increases in urban, agricultural, and industrial needs, there is less water available for the environment.
Texas has only one natural lake, Caddo Lake in East Texas, but it has over 50 water reservoirs built to meet the needs of the expanding population. Within the upper coast, where there is plentiful rainfall and freshwater inflow, estuaries are doing well. In the middle coast, where there is not much human population, several issues have arisen, but overall the estuaries are doing well. In the Corpus Christi area, however, where the Nueces River provides little freshwater inflow anymore, due to water-capture in two large reservoirs, the estuary is showing signs of stress and health failure.

---new item--

